The Project Gutenberg eBook of Chess Fundamentals
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Chess Fundamentals

Author: José Raúl Capablanca

Release date: October 18, 2010 [eBook #33870]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Suzanne Shell, Jana Srna,
        Keith Edkins and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
        at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHESS FUNDAMENTALS ***




Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Suzanne Shell, Jana Srna,
Keith Edkins and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: JOSÉ R. CAPABLANCA]

CHESS
FUNDAMENTALS

BY

JOSÉ R. CAPABLANCA

_CHESS CHAMPION OF THE WORLD_





NEW YORK HARCOURT, BRACE & WORLD, INC.
LONDON: G. BELL AND SONS, LTD.

       *       *       *       *       *


COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY

HARCOURT, BRACE & WORLD, INC.

© 1949 BY OLGA CAPABLANCA

_All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher._

_Seventeenth Printing_



PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

       *       *       *       *       *


PREFACE

_Chess Fundamentals_ was first published thirteen years ago. Since then
there have appeared at different times a number of articles dealing with
the so-called Hypermodern Theory. Those who have read the articles may well
have thought that something new, of vital importance, had been discovered.
The fact is that the Hypermodern Theory is merely the application, during
the opening stages generally, of the same old principles through the medium
of somewhat new tactics. There has been no change in the fundamentals. The
change has been only a change of form, and not always for the best at that.

In chess the tactics may change but the strategic fundamental principles
are always the same, so that _Chess Fundamentals_ is as good now as it was
thirteen years ago. It will be as good a hundred years from now; as long in
fact as the laws and rules of the game remain what they are at present. The
reader may therefore go over the contents of the book with the assurance
that there is in it everything he needs, and that there is nothing to be
added and nothing to be changed. _Chess Fundamentals_ was the one standard
work of its kind thirteen years ago and the author firmly believes that it
is the one standard work of its kind now.

J. R. CAPABLANCA

_New York_

_Sept. 1, 1934_

       *       *       *       *       *


LIST OF CONTENTS

  PART I

  CHAPTER I

  First Principles: Endings, Middle-game and Openings

                                                          PAGE

  1. SOME SIMPLE MATES                                       3

  2. PAWN PROMOTION                                          9

  3. PAWN ENDINGS                                           13

  4. SOME WINNING POSITIONS IN THE MIDDLE-GAME              19

  5. RELATIVE VALUE OF THE PIECES                           24

  6. GENERAL STRATEGY OF THE OPENING                        25

  7. CONTROL OF THE CENTRE                                  28

  8. TRAPS                                                  32

  CHAPTER II

  FURTHER PRINCIPLES IN END-GAME PLAY

  9. A CARDINAL PRINCIPLE                                   35

  10. A CLASSICAL ENDING                                    37

  11. OBTAINING A PASSED PAWN                               40

  12. HOW TO FIND OUT WHICH PAWN WILL BE THE FIRST TO QUEEN 41

  13. THE OPPOSITION                                        43

  14. THE RELATIVE VALUE OF KNIGHT AND BISHOP               50

  15. HOW TO MATE WITH KNIGHT AND BISHOP                    59

  16. QUEEN AGAINST ROOK                                    62

  CHAPTER III

  PLANNING A WIN IN MIDDLE-GAME PLAY

  17. ATTACKING WITHOUT THE AID OF KNIGHTS                  68

  18. ATTACKING WITH KNIGHTS AS A PROMINENT FORCE           71

  19. WINNING BY INDIRECT ATTACK                            75

  CHAPTER IV

  GENERAL THEORY

  20. THE INITIATIVE                                        77

  21. DIRECT ATTACKS EN MASSE                               78

  22. THE FORCE OF THE THREATENED ATTACK                    82

  23. RELINQUISHING THE INITIATIVE                          89

  24. CUTTING OFF PIECES FROM THE SCENE OF ACTION           94

  25. A PLAYER'S MOTIVES CRITICISED IN A SPECIMEN GAME      99

  CHAPTER V

  END-GAME STRATEGY

  26. THE SUDDEN ATTACK FROM A DIFFERENT SIDE              111

  27. THE DANGER OF A SAFE POSITION                        120

  28. ENDINGS WITH ONE ROOK AND PAWNS                      122

  29. A DIFFICULT ENDING: TWO ROOKS AND PAWNS              127

  30. ROOK, BISHOP AND PAWNS _v._ ROOK, KNIGHT AND PAWNS   138
  (A Final Example of preserving Freedom whilst
  imposing restraint.)

  CHAPTER VI

  FURTHER OPENINGS AND MIDDLE-GAMES

  31. SOME SALIENT POINTS ABOUT PAWNS                      143

  32. SOME POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENTS FROM A RUY LOPEZ
  (showing the weakness of a backward Q B P; the
  power of a Pawn at K 5, etc.)                            146

  33. THE INFLUENCE OF A "HOLE"                            150

  PART II

  ILLUSTRATIVE GAMES

  GAME.

   1. QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED (MATCH, 1909)                159
      White: F. J. Marshall. Black: J. R. Capablanca.

   2. QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED (SAN SEBASTIAN, 1911)        163
      White: A. K. Rubinstein. Black: J. R. Capablanca.

   3. IRREGULAR DEFENCE (HAVANA, 1913)                     169
      White: D. Janowski. Black: J. R. Capablanca.

   4. FRENCH DEFENCE (ST. PETERSBURG, 1913)                174
      White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: E. A. Snosko-Borovski.

   5. RUY LOPEZ (ST. PETERSBURG, 1914)                     181
      White: Dr. E. Lasker. Black: J. R. Capablanca.

   6. FRENCH DEFENCE (RICE MEMORIAL TOURNAMENT, 1916)      189
      White: O. Chajes. Black: J. R. Capablanca.

   7. RUY LOPEZ (SAN SEBASTIAN, 1911)                      197
      White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: A. Burn.

   8. CENTRE GAME (BERLIN, 1913)                           201
      White: J. Mieses. Black: J. R. Capablanca.

   9. QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED (BERLIN, 1913)               209
      White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: R. Teichmann.

  10. PETROFF DEFENCE (ST. PETERSBURG, 1914)               215
      White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: F. J. Marshall.

  11. RUY LOPEZ (ST. PETERSBURG, 1914)                     221
      White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: D. Janowski.

  12. FRENCH DEFENCE (NEW YORK, 1918)                      225
      White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: O. Chajes.

  13. RUY LOPEZ (NEW YORK, 1918)                           231
      White: J. S. Morrison. Black: J.R. Capablanca.

  14. QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED (NEW YORK, 1918)             238
      White: F. J. Marshall. Black: J.R. Capablanca.

       *       *       *       *       *


{3}

CHESS FUNDAMENTALS

PART I

CHAPTER I

FIRST PRINCIPLES: ENDINGS, MIDDLE-GAME AND OPENINGS

The first thing a student should do, is to familiarise himself with the
power of the pieces. This can best be done by learning how to accomplish
quickly some of the simple mates.

1. SOME SIMPLE MATES

EXAMPLE 1.--The ending Rook and King against King.

_The principle is to drive the opposing King to the last line on any side
of the board_.

[Illustration] {4}

In this position the power of the Rook is demonstrated by the first move,
R - R 7, which immediately confines the Black King to the last rank, and
the mate is quickly accomplished by: 1 R - R 7, K - Kt 1; 2 K - Kt 2.

The combined action of King and Rook is needed to arrive at a position in
which mate can be forced. The general principle for a beginner to follow is
to

_keep his King as much as possible on the same rank, or, as in this case,
file, as the opposing King._

When, in this case, the King has been brought to the sixth rank, it is
better to place it, not on the same file, but on the one next to it towards
the centre.

2...K - B 1; 3 K - B 3, K - K 1; 4 K - K 4, K - Q 1; 5 K - Q 5, K - B 1;
6 K - Q 6.

Not K - B 6, because then the Black King will go back to Q 1 and it will
take much longer to mate. If now the King moves back to Q 1, R - R 8 mates
at once.

6...K - Kt 1; 7 R - Q B 7, K - R 1; 8 K - B 6, K - Kt 1; 9 K - Kt 6,
K - R 1; 10 R - B 8 mate.

It has taken exactly ten moves to mate from the original position. On move
5 Black could have played K - K 1, and, according to principle, White would
have continued 6 K - Q 6, K - B 1 (the Black King will ultimately be forced
to move in front of the White King and be mated by R - R 8); 7 K - K 6,
K - Kt 1; 8 K - B 6, K - R 1; 9 K - Kt 6, K - Kt 1; 10 R - R 8 mate. {5}

EXAMPLE 2.

[Illustration]

Since the Black King is in the centre of the board, the best way to proceed
is to advance your own King thus: 1 K - K 2, K - Q 4; 2 K - K 3. As the
Rook has not yet come into play, it is better to advance the King straight
into the centre of the board, not in front, but to one side of the other
King. Should now the Black King move to K 4, the Rook drives it back by
R - R 5 ch. On the other hand, if 2... K - B 5 instead, then also
3 R - R 5. If now 3... K - Kt 5, there follows 4 K - Q 3; but if instead
3... K - B 6; then 4 R - R 4, keeping the King confined to as few squares
as possible.

Now the ending may continue: 4...K - B 7; 5 R - B 4 ch, K - Kt 6;
6 K - Q 3, K - Kt 7; 7 R - Kt 4 ch, K - R 6; 8 K - B 3, K - R 7. It should
be noticed how often the White King has moved next to the Rook, not only to
defend it, but also to reduce the mobility of the opposing King. Now {6}
White mates in three moves thus: 9 R - R 4 ch, K - Kt 8; 10 R -  any square
on the Rook's file, forcing the Black King in front of the White, K - B 8;
11 R - R 1 mate. It has taken eleven moves to mate, and, under any
conditions, I believe it should be done in under twenty. While it may be
monotonous, it is worth while for the beginner to practice such things, as
it will teach him the proper handling of his pieces.

EXAMPLE 3.--Now we come to two Bishops and King against King.

[Illustration]

Since the Black King is in the corner, White can play 1 B - Q 3, K - Kt 2;
2 B - K Kt 5, K - B 2; 3 B - B 5, and already the Black King is confined to
a few squares. If the Black King, in the original position, had been in the
centre of the board, or away from the last row, White should have advanced
his King, and then, with the aid of his Bishops, restricted {7} the Black
King's movements to as few squares as possible.

We might now continue: 3...K - Kt 2; 4 K - B 2. In this ending the Black
King must not only be driven to the edge of the board, but he must also be
forced into a corner, and, before a mate can be given, the White King must
be brought to the sixth rank and, at the same time, in one of the last two
files; in this case either K R 6, K Kt 6, K B 7, K B 8, and as K R 6 and
K Kt 6 are the nearest squares, it is to either of these squares that the
King ought to go. 4...K - B 2; 5 K - Kt 3, K - Kt 2; 6 K - R 4, K - B 2;
7 K - R 5, K - Kt 2; 8 B - Kt 6, K - Kt 1; 9 K - R 6, K - B 1. White must
now mark time and move one of the Bishops, so as to force the Black King to
go back; 10 B - R 5, K - Kt 1; 11 B - K 7, K - R 1. Now the White Bishop
must take up a position from which it can give check next move along the
White diagonal, when the Black King moves back to Kt 1. 12 B - K Kt 4,
K - Kt 1; 13 B - K 6 ch, K - R 1; 14 B - B 6 mate.

It has taken fourteen moves to force the mate and, in any position, it
should be done in under thirty.

In all endings of this kind, care must be taken not to drift into a stale
mate.

In this particular ending one should remember that the King must not only
be driven to the edge of the board, but also into a corner. In all such
endings, however, it is immaterial whether the King is forced {8} on to the
last rank, or to an outside file, e.g. K R 5 or Q R 4, K 1 or Q 8.

EXAMPLE 4.--We now come to Queen and King against King. As the Queen
combines the power of the Rook and the Bishop, it is the easiest mate of
all and should always be accomplished in under ten moves. Take the
following position:

[Illustration]

A good way to begin is to make the first move with the Queen, trying to
limit the Black King's mobility as much as possible. Thus: 1 Q - B 6,
K - Q 5; 2 K - Q 2. Already the Black King has only one available square
2...K - K 4; 3 K - K 3, K - B 4; 4 Q - Q 6, K - Kt 4. (Should Black play
K - Kt 5, then Q - Kt 6 ch); 5 Q - K 6, K - R 5 (if K - R 4, K - B 4 and
mate next move); 6 Q - K Kt 6, K - R 6; 7 K - B 3, K moves; 8 Q mates.

In this ending, as in the case of the Rook, the Black King must be forced
to the edge of the board; only {9} the Queen being so much more powerful
than the Rook, the process is far easier and shorter. These are the three
elementary endings and in all of these the principle is the same. In each
case the co-operation of the King is needed. In order to force a mate
without the aid of the King, at least two Rooks are required.

       *       *       *       *       *

2. PAWN PROMOTION

The gain of a Pawn is the smallest material advantage that can be obtained
in a game; and it often is sufficient to win, even when the Pawn is the
only remaining unit, apart from the Kings. It is essential, speaking
generally, that

_the King should be in front of his Pawn, with at least one intervening
square_.

If the opposing King is directly in front of the Pawn, then the game cannot
be won. This can best be explained by the following examples.

EXAMPLE 5.

[Illustration] {10}

The position is drawn, and the way to proceed is for Black to keep the King
always directly in front of the Pawn, and when it cannot be done, as for
instance in this position because of the White King, then the Black King
must be kept in front of the White King. The play would proceed thus:
1 P - K 3, K - K 4; 2 K - Q 3, K - Q 4. This is a very important move. Any
other move would lose, as will be shown later. As the Black King cannot be
kept close up to the Pawn, it must be brought as far forward as possible
and, at the same time, in front of the White King.

3 P - K 4 ch, K - K 4; 4 K - K 3, K - K 3; 5 K - B 4, K - B 3. Again the
same case. As the White King comes up, the Black King must be kept in front
of it, since it cannot be brought up to the Pawn.

6 P - K 5 ch, K - K 3; 7 K - K 4, K - K 2; 8 K - Q 5, K - Q 2;
9 P - K 6 ch, K - K 2; 10 K - K 5, K - K 1; 11 K - Q 6, K - Q 1. If now
White advances the Pawn, the Black King gets in front of it and White must
either give up the Pawn or play K - K 6, and a stale mate results. If
instead of advancing the Pawn White withdraws his King, Black brings his
King up to the Pawn and, when forced to go back, he moves to K _in front_
of the Pawn ready to come up again or to move in front of the White King,
as before, should the latter advance.

The whole mode of procedure is very important and the student should become
thoroughly conversant {11} with its details; for it involves principles to
be taken up later on, and because many a beginner has lost identical
positions from lack of proper knowledge. At this stage of the book I cannot
lay too much stress on its importance.

EXAMPLE 6.--In this position White wins, as the King is in front of his
Pawn and there is one intervening square.

[Illustration]

The method to follow is to

_advance the King as far as is compatible with the safety of the Pawn and
never to advance the Pawn until it is essential to its own safety_.

Thus:

        1. K - K 4, K - K 3.

Black does not allow the White King to advance, therefore White is now
compelled to advance his Pawn so as to force Black to move away. He is then
able to advance his own King.

        2. P - K3, K - B 3; 3. K - Q 5, K - K 2.

{12} If Black had played 3...K - B 4, then White would be forced to advance
the Pawn to K 4, since he could not advance his King without leaving Black
the opportunity to play K - K 5, winning the Pawn. Since he has not done
so, it is better for White not to advance the Pawn yet, since its own
safety does not require it, but to try to bring the King still further
forward. Thus:

        4. K - K 5, K - Q 2; 5. K - B 6, K - K 1.

Now the White Pawn is too far back and it may be brought up within
protection of the King.

        6. P - K 4, K - Q 2.

Now it would not do to play K - B 7, because Black would play K - Q 3, and
White would have to bring back his King to protect the Pawn. Therefore he
must continue.

        7. P - K 5, K - K 1.

Had he moved anywhere else, White could have played K - B 7, followed by
the advance of the Pawn to K 6, K 7, K 8; all these squares being protected
by the King. As Black tries to prevent that, White must now force him to
move away, at the same time always keeping the King in front of the Pawn.
Thus:

        8. K - K 6.

P - K 6 would make it a draw, as Black would then play K - B, and we would
have a position similar to the one explained in connection with Example 5.

        8...K - B 1;  9. K - Q 7.

{13} King moves and the White Pawn advances to K 8, becomes a Queen, and it
is all over.

This ending is like the previous one, and for the same reasons should be
thoroughly understood before proceeding any further.

       *       *       *       *       *

3. PAWN ENDINGS

I shall now give a couple of simple endings of two Pawns against one, or
three against two, that the reader may see how they can be won. Fewer
explanations will be given, as it is up to the student to work things out
for himself. Furthermore, nobody can learn how to play well merely from the
study of a book; it can only serve as a guide and the rest must be done by
the teacher, if the student has one; if not, the student must realise by
long and bitter experience the practical application of the many things
explained in the book.

EXAMPLE 7.

[Illustration]

{14} In this position White cannot win by playing 1 P - B 6, because Black
plays, not P × P, which would lose, but 1...K - Kt 1, and if then 2 P × P,
K × P, and draws, as shown in a previous case. If 2 P - B 7 ch, K - B 1,
and White will never be able to Queen his Pawn without losing it. If
2 K - K 7, P × P; 3 K × P, K - B 1, and draws. White, however, can win the
position given in the diagram by playing:

1 K - Q 7, K - Kt 1; 2 K - K 7, K - R 1; 3 P - B 6, P × P. If 3...K - Kt 1;
4 P - B 7 ch, K - R 1; 5 P - B 8 (Q) mate.

4 K - B 7, P - B 4; 5 P - Kt 7 ch, K - R 2; 6 P - Kt 8 (Q) ch, K - R 3;
7 Q - Kt 6 mate.

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 8.--In the above position White can't win by 1 P - B 5. Black's
best answer would be P - Kt 3 draws. (The student should work this out.) He
cannot win by 1 P - Kt 5, because P - Kt 3 draws. (This, because of the
principle of the "_opposition_" {15} which governs this ending as well as
all the Pawn-endings already given, and which will be explained more fully
later on.)

White can win, however, by playing: 1 K - K 4, K - K 3. (If 1...P - Kt 3;
2 K - Q 4, K - K 3; 3 K - B 5, K - B 3; 4 K - Q 6, K - B 2; 5 P - Kt 5,
K - Kt 2; 6 K - K 7, K - Kt 1; 7 K - B 6, K - R 2; 8 K - B 7 and White wins
the Pawn.)

2 P - B 5 ch, K - B 3; 3 K - B 4, P - Kt 3. (If this Pawn is kept back we
arrive at the ending shown in Example 7.) 4 P - Kt 5 ch, K - B 2;
5 P - B 6, K - K 3; 6 K - K 4, K - B 2; 7 K - K 5, K - B 1. White cannot
force his Bishop's Pawn into Q (find out why), but by giving his Pawn up he
can win the other Pawn and the game. Thus:

8 P - B 7, K × P; 9 K - Q 6, K - B 1; 10 K - K 6, K - Kt 2; 11 K - K 7,
K - Kt 1; 12 K - B 6, K - R 2; 13 K - B 7, K - R 1; 14 K × P , K - Kt 1.

There is still some resistance in Black's position. In fact, the only way
to win is the one given here, as will easily be seen by experiment.

15 K - R 6 (if K - B 6, K - R 2; and in order to win White must get back to
the actual position, as against 16 P - Kt 6 ch, K - R 1 draws), K - R 1;
16 P - Kt 6, K - Kt 1; 17 P - Kt 7, K - B 2; 18 K - R 7, and White queens
the Pawn and wins.

This ending, apparently so simple, should show the student the enormous
difficulties to be surmounted, {16} even when there are hardly any pieces
left, when playing against an adversary who knows how to use the resources
at his disposal, and it should show the student, also, the necessity of
paying strict attention to these elementary things which form the basis of
true mastership in Chess.

EXAMPLE 9.--In this ending

[Illustration]

White can win by advancing any of the three Pawns on the first move, but it
is convenient to follow the general rule, whenever there is no good reason
against it, of _advancing the Pawn that has no Pawn opposing it_. Thus we
begin by--

        1. P - B 5, K - K 2.

If P - Kt 3, P - B 6; and we have a similar ending to one of those shown
above. If 1...P - R 3; 2 P - Kt 5.

        2. K - K 5, K - B 2; 3. P - Kt 5, K - K 2.

{17} If 3...P - Kt 3; 4 P - B 6, and if 3...P - R 3; 4 P - Kt 6 ch, and in
either case we have a similar ending to one of those already shown.

        4. P - R 5,

and by following it up with P - Kt 6 we have the same ending previously
shown. Should Black play 4...P - Kt 3, then R P × P, P × P; P - B 6 ch with
the same result.

Having now seen the cases when the Pawns are all on one side of the board
we shall now examine a case when there are Pawns on both sides of the
board.

EXAMPLE 10.--In these cases the general rule is to _act immediately on the
side where you have the superior forces_. Thus we have:

[Illustration]

        1. P - K Kt 4.

{18} It is generally advisable to advance the Pawn that is free from
opposition.

        1. ........               P - Q R 4.

Black makes an advance on the other side, and now White considers whether
or not he should stop the advance. In this case either way wins, but
generally the advance should be stopped when the opposing King is far away.

        2. P - Q R 4, K - B 3; 3. P - R 4, K - K 3.

If 3...K - Kt 3, then simple counting will show that White goes to the
other side with his King, wins the P at Q R 4, and then Queens his single
Pawn long before Black can do the same.

        4. P - Kt 5, K - B 2; 5. K - B 5, K - Kt 2; 6. P - R 5, K - B 2.

If 6...P - R 3; 7 P - Kt 6, and then the two Pawns defend themselves and
White can go to the other side with his King, to win the other Pawn.

        7. K - K 5.

Now it is time to go to the other side with the King, win the Black Pawn
and Queen the single Pawn. This is typical of all such endings and should
be worked out by the student in this case and in similar cases which he can
put up. {19}

       *       *       *       *       *

4. SOME WINNING POSITIONS IN THE MIDDLE-GAME

By the time the student has digested all that has been previously
explained, he, no doubt, is anxious to get to the actual game and play with
all the pieces. However, before considering the openings, we shall devote a
little time to some combinations that often arise during the game, and
which will give the reader some idea of the beauty of the game, once he
becomes better acquainted with it.

EXAMPLE 11.

[Illustration]

It is Black's move, and thinking that White merely threatens to play
Q - R 6 and to mate at K Kt 7, Black plays 1 ... R - K 1, threatening mate
by way of R - K 8. White now uncovers his real and most effective threat,
viz.:

1 ... R - K 1; 2 Q × P ch, K × Q; 3 R - R 3 ch, K - Kt 1; 4 R - R 8 mate.
{20}

This same type of combination may come as the result of a somewhat more
complicated position.

EXAMPLE 12.

[Illustration]

White is a piece behind, and unless he can win it back quickly he will
lose; he therefore plays:

        1. Kt × Kt                B - Kt 4

He cannot take the Kt because White threatens mate by Q × P ch followed by
R - R 3 ch.

        2. Kt - K 7 ch            Q × Kt

Again if B × Kt; Q × P ch, K × Q; R - R 3 ch, King moves; R - R 8 mate.

        3. R × Q                  B × R
        4. Q - Q 7

and White wins one of the two Bishops, remains with a Q and a B against a R
and B, and should therefore win easily. These two examples show the {21}
danger of advancing the K Kt P one square, after having Castled on that
side.

EXAMPLE 13.

[Illustration]

This is another very interesting type of combination. Black has a R for a
Kt and should therefore win, unless White is able to obtain some
compensation immediately. White, in fact, mates in a few moves thus:

        1. Kt - B 6 ch            P × Kt

Forced, otherwise Q X P mates.

        2. Q - Kt 3 ch            K - R 1
        3. B × P mate.

EXAMPLE 14.--The same type of combination occurs in a more complicated form
in the following position. {22}

[Illustration]

        1. B × Kt                 Q × B.

If ...B × Kt; Q - B 3 threatens mate, and therefore wins the Q, which is
already attacked.

        2. Kt - B 6 ch            P × Kt
        3. R - Kt 3 ch            K - R 1
        4. B × P mate.

EXAMPLE 15.--A very frequent type of combination is shown in the following
position.

[Illustration] {23}

Here White is the exchange and a Pawn behind, but he can win quickly thus:
1 B × P ch, K × B. (If 1...K - R 1; 2 Q - K R 5, P - K Kt 3; 3 Q - R 6, and
wins.)

2 Q - R 5 ch, K - Kt 1; 3 Kt - Kt 5, and Black cannot stop mate at K R 7
except by sacrificing the Queen by Q - K 5, which would leave White with a
Q for a R.

EXAMPLE 16.--This same type of combination is seen in a more complicated
form in the following position.

[Illustration]

White proceeds as follows: 1 Kt × Kt ch (this clears the line for the B);
B × Kt (to stop the Kt from moving to Kt 5 after the sacrifice of the B);
2 R × B, Kt × R best; 3 B × P ch, K × B. (If 3..K - R 1; 4 Q - R 5,
P - K Kt 3; 5 B × P ch, K - Kt 2; 6 Q - R 7 ch, K - B 3; 7 P - Kt 5 ch,
K - K 3; 8 B × P ch, R × B; 9 Q - K 4 mate.) 4 Q - R 5 ch, K - Kt 1;
5 Kt - Kt 5, R - B 1; {24} 6 Q - R 7 ch, K - B 1; 7 Q - R 8 ch, Kt - Kt 1;
8 Kt - R 7 ch, K - K 2; 9 R - K 1 ch, K - Q 1; 10 Q × Kt mate.

This combination is rather long and has many variations, therefore a
beginner will hardly be able to fathom it; but, knowing the type of
combination, he might under similar circumstances undertake and carry out a
brilliant attack which he would otherwise never think of. It will be seen
that all the combinations shown have for a foundation the proper
co-ordination of the pieces, which have all been brought to bear against a
weak point.

       *       *       *       *       *

5. RELATIVE VALUE OF THE PIECES

Before going on to the general principles of the openings, it is advisable
to give the student an idea of the proper relative value of the pieces.
There is no complete and accurate table for all of them, and the only thing
to do is to compare the pieces separately.

For all general theoretical purposes the Bishop and the Knight have to be
considered as of the same value, though it is my opinion that the Bishop
will prove the more valuable piece in most cases; and it is well known that
two Bishops are almost always better than two Knights.

The Bishop will be stronger against Pawns than the Knight, and in
combination with Pawns will also be stronger against the Rook than the
Knight will be. {25}

A Bishop and a Rook are also stronger than a Knight and a Rook, but a Queen
and a Knight may be stronger than a Queen and a Bishop.

A Bishop will often be worth more than three Pawns, but a Knight very
seldom so, and may even not be worth so much.

A Rook will be worth a Knight and two Pawns, or a Bishop and two Pawns,
but, as said before, the Bishop will be a better piece against the Rook.

Two Rooks are slightly stronger than a Queen. They are slightly weaker than
two Knights and a Bishop, and a little more so than two Bishops and a
Knight. The power of the Knight decreases as the pieces are changed off.
The power of the Rook, on the contrary, increases.

The King, a purely _defensive_ piece throughout the middle-game, becomes an
_offensive_ piece once all the pieces are off the board, and sometimes even
when there are one or two minor pieces left. The handling of the King
becomes of paramount importance once the end-game stage is reached.

       *       *       *       *       *

6. GENERAL STRATEGY OF THE OPENING

The main thing is to _develop the pieces quickly_. Get them into play as
fast as you can.

From the outset two moves, 1 P - K 4  or 1 P - Q 4, open up lines for the
Queen and a Bishop. Therefore, theoretically one of these two moves must be
the best, as no other first move accomplishes so much. {26}

EXAMPLE 17.--Suppose we begin:

        1. P - K 4                P - K 4
        2. Kt - K B 3

This is both an attacking and a developing move. Black can now either reply
with the identical move or play

        2. ........               Kt - Q B 3

This developing move at the same time defends the King's Pawn.

        3. Kt - B 3               Kt - B 3

These moves are of a purely developing nature.

        4. B - Kt 5

_It is generally advisable not to bring this Bishop out until one Knight is
out_, preferably the King's Knight. The Bishop could also have been played
to B 4, but it is advisable whenever possible to combine development and
attack.

        4. ........               B - Kt 5

Black replies in the same manner, threatening a possible exchange of Bishop
for Knight with Kt × P to follow.

        5. O - O

an indirect way of preventing 5...B × Kt, which more experience or study
will show to be bad. At the same time _the Rook is brought into action in
the centre, a very important point_. {27}

        5. ........               O - O

Black follows the same line of reasoning.

        6. P - Q 3                P - Q 3

These moves have a two-fold object, viz.: to protect the King's Pawn and to
open the diagonal for the development of the Queen's Bishop.

        7. B - Kt 5

[Illustration]

A very powerful move, which brings us to the middle-game stage, as there is
already in view a combination to win quickly by Kt - Q 5. This threat makes
it impossible for Black to continue the same course. (There is a long
analysis showing that Black should lose if he also plays B - Kt 5.) He is
now forced to play 7...B × Kt, as experience has shown, thus bringing up to
notice three things.

First, the complete development of the opening has taken only seven moves.
(This varies up to ten or twelve moves in some very exceptional cases. As a
rule, eight should be enough.) Second, Black has {28} been compelled to
exchange a Bishop for a Knight, but as a compensation he has isolated
White's Q R P and doubled a Pawn. (This, at such an early stage of the
game, is rather an advantage for White, as the Pawn is doubled towards the
centre of the board.) Third, White by the exchange brings up a Pawn to
control the square Q 4, puts Black on the defensive, as experience will
show, and thus keeps _the initiative_, an unquestionable advantage.[1]

The strategical principles expounded above are the same for all the
openings, only their tactical application varies according to the
circumstances.

Before proceeding further I wish to lay stress on the following point which
the student should bear in mind.

_Before development has been completed no piece should be moved more than
once, unless it is essential in order to obtain either material advantage
or to secure freedom of action._

The beginner would do well to remember this, as well as what has already
been stated: viz., _bring out the Knights before bringing out the Bishops_.

       *       *       *       *       *

7. CONTROL OF THE CENTRE

The four squares, K 4 and Q 4 on each side respectively, are the centre
squares, and control of these squares is called control of the centre. _The
control of the centre is of great importance._ No violent attack can
succeed without controlling at least two of these {29} squares, and
possibly three. Many a manoeuvre in the opening has for its sole object the
control of the centre, which invariably ensures the initiative. It is well
always to bear this in mind, since it will often be the reason of a series
of moves which could not otherwise be properly understood. As this book
progresses I shall dwell more fully on these different points. At present I
shall devote some time to openings taken at random and explain the moves
according to general principles. The student will in that way train his
mind in the proper direction, and will thus have less trouble in finding a
way out when confronted with a new and difficult situation.

EXAMPLE 18.

        1. P - K 4                P - K 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             P - Q 3

A timid move. Black assumes a defensive attitude at once. On principle the
move is wrong. In the openings, whenever possible, _pieces should be moved
in preference to Pawns_.

        3. P - Q 4

White takes the offensive immediately and strives to control the centre so
as to have ample room to deploy his forces.

        3. ........               Kt - Q 2

Black does not wish to relinquish the centre and also prefers the text move
to Kt - Q B 3, which would be the more natural square for the Kt. But on
{30} principle the move is wrong, because it blocks the action of the
Queen's Bishop, and instead of facilitating the action of Black's pieces,
tends, on the contrary, to cramp them.

        4. B - Q B 4              P - K R 3

Black is forced to pay the penalty of his previous move. Such a move on
Black's part condemns by itself any form of opening that makes it
necessary. White threatened Kt - Kt 5 and Black could not stop it with
4...B - K 2, because of 5 P × P, Kt × P (if 5...P × P, 6 Q - Q 5);
6 Kt × Kt, P × Kt; 7 Q - R 5, and White wins a Pawn and has besides a
perfectly safe position.

        5. Kt - B 3               K Kt - B 3
        6. B - K 3                B - K 2
        7. Q - K 2

It should be noticed that White does not Castle yet. The reason is that he
wants to deploy his forces first, and through the last move force Black to
play P - Q B 3 to make room for the Queen as White threatens R - Q 1, to be
followed by P × P. Black's other alternatives would finally force him to
play P × P, thus abandoning the centre to White.

        7. ........               P - B 3
        8. R - Q 1                Q - B 2
        9. O - O

With this last move White completes his development, while Black is
evidently somewhat hampered. A simple examination will suffice to show that
White's position {31} is unassailable. There are no weak spots in his
armour, and his pieces are ready for any manoeuvre that he may wish to
carry out in order to begin the attack on the enemy's position. The student
should carefully study this example. It will show him that it is sometimes
convenient to delay Castling. I have given the moves as they come to my
mind without following any standard book on openings. Whether the moves
given by me agree or not with the standard works, I do not know, but at the
present stage of this book it is not convenient to enter into discussions
of mere technicalities which the student will be able to understand when he
has become more proficient.

EXAMPLE 19.

        1. P - K 4                P - K 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             P - Q 3
        3. P - Q 4                B - Kt 5

A bad move, which violates one of the principles set down, according to
which at least one Knight should be developed before the Bishops are
brought out, and also because it exchanges a Bishop for a Knight, which in
the opening is generally bad, unless there is some compensation.

        4. P × P                  B × Kt

4...P × P loses a Pawn.

        5. Q × B                  P × P
        6. B - Q B 4              Q - B 3

If Kt - B 3; Q - Q Kt 3 wins a Pawn.

{32} /*    7. Q - Q Kt 3 P - Q Kt 3    8. Kt - B 3 P - Q B 3 */

To prevent Kt - Q 5.

[Illustration]

Black, however, has no pieces out except his Queen, and White, with a
Bishop and a Knight already developed, has a chance of obtaining an
advantage quickly by playing Kt - Q 5 anyway. The student is left to work
out the many variations arising from this position.

These examples will show the practical application of the principles
previously enunciated. The student is warned against playing Pawns in
preference to pieces at the beginning of the game, especially P - K R 3 and
P - Q R 3, which are moves very commonly indulged in by beginners.

       *       *       *       *       *

8. TRAPS

I shall now give a few positions or traps to be avoided in the openings,
and in which (practice has shown) beginners are often caught. {33}

EXAMPLE 20.

[Illustration]

White plays:

        1. P × P                  Kt × P

Black should have recaptured with the Pawn.

        2. Kt × Kt                B × Q
        3. B × P ch               K - K 2
        4. Kt - Q 5 mate.

EXAMPLE 21.

[Illustration]

{34} Black, having the move, should play P - K 3. But suppose he plays
Kt - K B 3 instead, then comes--

        1. B × P ch

Kt - K 5 would also give White the advantage, the threat being of course if
B × Q; 2 B × P mate. Nor does B - R 5 help matters, because of 2 Q × B,
1... B - K 3 leaves Black with the inferior position. But White's move in
the text secures an immediate material advantage, and the beginner at any
rate should never miss such an opportunity for the sake of a speculative
advantage in position.

        1. ........               K × B
        2. Kt - K 5 ch            K moves
        3. Kt × B

and White has won a Pawn besides having the better position.

There are a good many other traps--in fact, there is a book written on
traps on the chess board; but the type given above is the most common of
all.

       *       *       *       *       *


{35}

CHAPTER II

FURTHER PRINCIPLES IN END-GAME PLAY

We shall now go back to the endings in search of a few more principles,
then again to the middle-game, and finally to the openings once more, so
that the advance may not only be gradual but homogeneous. In this way the
foundation on which we expect to build the structure will be firm and
solid.

9. A CARDINAL PRINCIPLE

[Illustration]

In the position shown above, White can draw by playing P - Kt 4 according
to the general rule that governs such cases, i.e. _to advance the Pawn that
is free from opposition_. But suppose that White, either because he does
not know this principle or because he {36} does not, in this case,
sufficiently appreciate the value of its application; suppose, we say, that
he plays 1 P - Q R 4. Then Black can win by playing 1... P - Q R 4,
applying one of the cardinal principles of the high strategy of chess--

        _A unit that holds two._

In this case one Pawn would hold two of the opponent's Pawns. The student
cannot lay too much stress on this principle. It can be applied in many
ways, and it constitutes one of the principal weapons in the hands of a
master.

EXAMPLE 22.--The example given should be sufficient proof. We give a few
moves of the main variation:--

        1. P - R 4                P - Q R 4
        2. K - Kt 2               K - B 5
            (Best; see why.)
        3. P - Kt 4               P × P
            (Best.)
        4. P - R 5                P - Kt 6
        5. P - R 6                P - Kt 7
        6. P - R 7                P - Kt 8 (Q)
        7. P - R 8 (Q)            Q - K 5 ch
        8. Q × Q                  K × Q

This brings the game to a position which is won by Black, and which
constitutes one of the classical endings of King and Pawns. I shall try to
explain the guiding idea of it to those not familiar with it. {37}

       *       *       *       *       *

10. A CLASSICAL ENDING

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 23.--In this position White's best line of defence consists in
keeping his Pawn where it stands at R 2. As soon as the Pawn is advanced it
becomes easier for Black to win. On the other hand, Black's plan to win
(supposing that White does not advance his Pawn) may be divided into three
parts. The first part will be to get his King to K R 6, at the same time
keeping intact the position of his Pawns. (This is all important, since, in
order to win the game, it is essential at the end that Black may be able to
advance his rearmost Pawn one or two squares according to the position of
the White King.)

        1. K - Kt 3               K - K 6
        2. K - Kt 2

If 2 K - Kt 4, K - B 7; 3 P - R 4, P - Kt 3 will win. {38}

        2. ........               K - B 5
        3. K - B 2                K - Kt 5
        4. K - Kt 2               K - R 5
        5. K - Kt 1               K - R 6

The first part has been completed.

[Illustration]

The second part will be short and will consist in advancing the R P up the
K.

        6. K - R 1                P - R 4
        7. K - Kt 1               P - R 5

This ends the second part.

[Illustration] {39}

The third part will consist in timing the advance of the Kt P so as to play
P - Kt 6 when the White King is at R 1. It now becomes evident how
necessary it is to be able to move the Kt P either one or two squares
according to the position of the White King, as indicated previously.[2] In
this case, as it is White's move, the Pawn will be advanced two squares
since the White King will be in the corner, but if it were now Black's move
the Kt P should only be advanced one square since the White King is at
Kt 1.

        8. K - R 1                P - Kt 4
        9. K - Kt 1               P - Kt 5
       10. K - R 1                P - Kt 6
       11. P × P

If K - Kt 1, P - Kt 7.

       11. ........               P × P
       12. K - Kt 1               P - Kt 7
       13. K - B 2                K - R 7

and wins.

It is in this analytical way that the student should try to learn. He will
thus train his mind to follow a logical sequence in reasoning out any
position. This example is excellent training, since it is easy to divide it
into three stages and to explain the main point of each part.

The next subject we shall study is the simple {40} opposition, but before
we devote our time to it I wish to call attention to two things.

       *       *       *       *       *

11. OBTAINING A PASSED PAWN

When three or more Pawns are opposed to each other in some such position as
the one in Example 24, there is always a chance for one side or the other
of obtaining a passed Pawn.

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 24.--In the above position the way of obtaining a passed Pawn is to
advance the centre Pawn.

        1. P - Kt 6               R P × P
  If B P × P; P - R 6,
        2. P - B 6                P × B P
        3. P - R 6

and as in this case the White Pawn is nearer to Queen than any of the Black
Pawns, White will {41} win. Now if it had been Black's move Black could
play

        1. ........               P - Kt 3
        2. B P × P                B P × P

It would not be advisable to try to obtain a passed Pawn because the White
Pawns would be nearer to Queen than the single Black Pawn.

        3. P × P                  P × P

and the game properly played would be a draw. The student should work this
out for himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

12. HOW TO FIND OUT WHICH PAWN WILL BE FIRST TO QUEEN

When two Pawns are free, or will be free, to advance to Queen, you can find
out, by counting, which Pawn will be the first to succeed.

EXAMPLE 25.--In this position whoever moves first wins.

[Illustration] {42}

The first thing is to find out, by counting, whether the opposing King can
be in time to stop the passed Pawn from Queening. When, as in this case, it
cannot be done, the point is to count which Pawn comes in first. In this
case the time is the same, but the Pawn that reaches the eighth square
first and becomes a Queen is in a position to capture the adversary's Queen
when he makes one. Thus:

        1. P - R 4                P - K R 4
        2. P - R 5                P - R 5
        3. P - Kt 6               P × P

Now comes a little calculation. White can capture the Pawn, but if he does
so, he will not, when Queening, command the square where Black will also
Queen his Pawn. Therefore, instead of taking, he plays:

        4. P - R 6                P - R 6
        5. P - R 7                P - R 7
        6. P - R 8 (Q), and wins.

The student would do well to acquaint himself with various simple endings
of this sort, so as to acquire the habit of counting, and thus be able to
know with ease when he can or cannot get there first. Once again I must
call attention to the fact that a book cannot by itself teach how to play.
It can only serve as a guide, and the rest must be learned by experience,
and if a teacher can be had at the same time, so much the faster will the
student be able to learn. {43}

       *       *       *       *       *

13. THE OPPOSITION

When Kings have to be moved, and one player can, by force, bring his King
into a position similar to the one shown in the following diagram, so that
his adversary is forced to move and make way for him, the player obtaining
that advantage is said to have _the opposition_.

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 26.--Suppose in the above position White plays

        1. K - Q 4

Now Black has the option of either opposing the passage of the White King
by playing K - Q 3 or, if he prefers, he can _pass_ with his own King by
replying K - B 4. Notice that the Kings are directly opposed to each other,
and the number of intervening squares between them is odd--one in this
case.

The opposition can take the form shown above, {44} which can be called
actual or close frontal opposition; or this form:

[Illustration]

which can be called actual or close diagonal opposition, or, again, this
form:

[Illustration]

which can be called actual or close lateral opposition.

In practice they are all one and the same. The Kings are always on squares
of the same colour, there is only one intervening square between the Kings,
and the player who has moved last "_has the opposition_." {45}

Now, if the student will take the trouble of moving each King backwards as
in a game in the same frontal, diagonal or lateral line respectively shown
in the diagrams, we shall have what may be called _distant_ frontal,
diagonal and lateral opposition respectively.

The matter of the opposition is highly important, and takes at times
somewhat complicated forms, all of which can be solved mathematically; but,
for the present, the student should only consider the most simple forms.
(An examination of some of the examples of King and Pawns endings already
given will show several cases of close opposition.)

In all simple forms of opposition,

_when the Kings are on the same line and the number of intervening squares
between them is even, the player who has the move has the opposition_.

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 27.--The above position shows to advantage the enormous value of
the opposition. The {46} position is very simple. Very little is left on
the board, and the position, to a beginner, probably looks absolutely even.
It is not the case, however. _Whoever has the move wins._ Notice that the
Kings are directly in front of one another, and that the number of
intervening squares is _even_.

Now as to the procedure to win such a position. The proper way to begin is
to move straight up. Thus:

        1. K - K 2                K - K 2
        2. K - K 3                K - K 3
        3. K - K 4                K - B 3

Now White can exercise the option of either playing K - Q 5 and thus
passing with his King, or of playing K - B 4 and prevent the Black King
from passing, thereby keeping the opposition. Mere counting will show that
the former course will only lead to a draw, therefore White takes the
latter course and plays:

        4. K - B 4                K - Kt 3

If 4...K - K 3; 5 K - Kt 5 will win.

        5. K - K 5                K - Kt 2

Now by counting it will be seen that White wins by capturing Black's Knight
Pawn.

The process has been comparatively simple in the variation given above, but
Black has other lines of {47} defence more difficult to overcome. Let us
begin anew.

        1. K - K 2                K - Q 1

Now if 2 K - Q 3, K - Q 2, or if 2 K - K 3, K - K 2, and Black obtains the
opposition in both cases. (When the Kings are directly in front of one
another, and the number of intervening squares between the Kings is _odd_,
the player who has moved last has the opposition.)

Now in order to win, the White King must advance. There is only one other
square where he can go, B 3, and that is the right place. Therefore it is
seen that in such cases when the opponent makes a so-called waiting move,
you must advance, leaving a rank or file free between the Kings. Therefore
we have--

        2. K - B 3                K - K 2

Now, it would be bad to advance, because then Black, by bringing up his
King in front of your King, would obtain the opposition. It is White's turn
to play a similar move to Black's first move, viz.:

        3. K - K 3

which brings the position back to the first variation shown. The student
would do well to familiarise himself with the handling of the King in all
examples of opposition. It often means the winning or losing of a game.

{48} EXAMPLE 28.--The following position is an excellent proof of the value
of the opposition as a means of defence.

[Illustration]

White is a Pawn behind and apparently lost, yet he can manage to draw as
follows:

        1. K - R 1 !

The position of the Pawns does not permit White to draw by means of the
actual or close opposition, hence he takes the distant opposition: in
effect if 1 K - B 1 (actual or close opposition), K - Q 7; 2 K - B 2,
K - Q 6 and White cannot continue to keep the lateral opposition essential
to his safety, because of his own Pawn at B 3. On the other hand, after the
text move, if

        1. ........               K - Q 7
        2. K - R 2                K - Q 6
        3. K - R 3 !              K - K 7
  {49}
        4. K - Kt 2               K - K 6
        5. K - Kt 3               K - Q 5
        6. K - Kt 4

attacking the Pawn and forcing Black to play 6... K - K 6 when he can go
back to Kt 3 as already shown, and always keep the opposition.

Going back to the original position, if

        1. K - R 1                P - Kt 5

White does not play P × P, because P - K 5 will win, but plays:

        2. K - Kt 2               K - Q 7

If 2...P × P ch; 3 K × P, followed by K - K 4, will draw.

        3. P × P                  P - K 5

and mere counting will show that both sides Queen, drawing the game.

If the student will now take the trouble to go back to the examples of King
and Pawns which I have given in this book,[3] he will realise that in all
of them the matter of the opposition is of paramount importance; as, in
fact, it is in nearly all endings of King and Pawns, except in such cases
where the Pawn-position in itself ensures the win.

{50}

       *       *       *       *       *

14. THE RELATIVE VALUE OF KNIGHT AND BISHOP

Before turning our attention to this matter it is well to state now that
_two Knights alone cannot mate_, but, under certain conditions of course,
they can do so if the opponent has one or more Pawns.

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 29.--In the above position White cannot win, although the Black
King is cornered, but in the following position, in which Black has a Pawn,

[Illustration]

White wins with or without the move. Thus:

        1. Kt - Kt 6              P - R 5

{51} White cannot take the Pawn because the game will be drawn, as
explained before.

        2. Kt - K 5               P - R 6
        3. Kt - B 6               P - R 7
        4. Kt - Kt 5              P - R 8 (Q)
        5. Kt - B 7 mate

The reason for this peculiarity in chess is evident.

_White with the two Knights can only stalemate the King, unless Black has a
Pawn which can be moved._

EXAMPLE 30.--Although he is a Bishop and a Pawn ahead the following
position cannot be won by White.

[Illustration]

It is the greatest weakness of the Bishop, that when the Rook's Pawn Queens
on a square of opposite colour and the opposing King is in front of the
Pawn, the Bishop is absolutely worthless. All that Black has to do is to
keep moving his King close to the corner square. {52}

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 31.--In the above position White with or without the move can win.
Take the most difficult variation.

        1. ........               K - R 7
        2. Kt - Kt 4 ch           K - R 8
        3. K - B 1                P - Kt 4
        4. K - B 2                P - R 7
        5. Kt - K 3               P - Kt 5
        6. Kt - B 1               P - Kt 6 ch
        7. Kt × P mate

Now that we have seen these exceptional cases, we can analyse the different
merits and the relative value of the Knight and the Bishop.

It is generally thought by amateurs that the Knight is the more valuable
piece of the two, the chief reason being that, unlike the Bishop, the
Knight can command both Black and White squares. However, the fact is
generally overlooked that the Knight, at any one time, {53} has the choice
of one colour only. It takes much longer to bring a Knight from one wing to
the other. Also, as shown in the following Example, a Bishop can stalemate
a Knight; a compliment which the Knight is unable to return.

EXAMPLE 32.

[Illustration]

The weaker the player the more terrible the Knight is to him, but as a
player increases in strength the value of the Bishop becomes more evident
to him, and of course there is, or should be, a corresponding decrease in
his estimation of the value of the Knight as compared to the Bishop. In
this respect, as in many others, the masters of to-day are far ahead of the
masters of former generations. While not so long ago some of the very best
amongst them, like Pillsbury and Tchigorin, preferred Knights to Bishops,
there is hardly a master of to-day who would not completely agree with the
statements made above. {54}

EXAMPLE 33.--This is about the only case when the Knight is more valuable
than the Bishop.

[Illustration]

It is what is called a "_block position_," and all the Pawns are on one
side of the board. (If there were Pawns on both sides of the board there
would be no advantage in having a Knight.) In such a position Black has
excellent chances of winning. Of course, there is an extra source of
weakness for White in having his Pawns on the same colour-squares as his
Bishop. This is a mistake often made by players. The proper way, generally,
in an ending, is to have your Pawns on squares of opposite colour to that
of your own Bishop. When you have your Pawns on squares of the same colour
the action of your own Bishop is limited by them, and consequently the
value of the Bishop is diminished, since the value of a piece can often be
measured by the number of squares it commands. While on this subject, I
shall also call attention to the {55} fact that it is generally preferable
to keep your Pawns on squares of the same colour as that of the opposing
Bishop, particularly if they are passed Pawns supported by the King. The
principles might be stated thus:

_When the opponent has a Bishop, keep your Pawns on squares of the same
colour as your opponent's Bishop._

_Whenever you have a Bishop, whether the opponent has also one or not, keep
your Pawns on squares of the opposite colour to that of your own Bishop._

Naturally, these principles have sometimes to be modified to suit the
exigencies of the position.

EXAMPLE 34.--In the following position the Pawns are on one side of the
board, and there is no advantage in having either a Knight or a Bishop. The
game should surely end in a draw.

[Illustration] {56}

EXAMPLE 35.--Now let us add three Pawns on each side to the above position,
so that there are Pawns on both sides of the board.

[Illustration]

It is now preferable to have the Bishop, though the position, if properly
played out, should end in a draw. The advantage of having the Bishop lies
as much in its ability to command, at long range, both sides of the board
from a central position as in its ability to move quickly from one side of
the board to the other.

[Illustration] {57}

EXAMPLE 36.--In the above position it is unquestionably an advantage to
have the Bishop, because, although each player has the same number of
Pawns, they are not balanced on each side of the board. Thus, on the King's
side, White has three to two, while on the Queen's side it is Black that
has three to two. Still, with proper play, the game should end in a draw,
though White has somewhat better chances.

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 37.--Here is a position in which to have the Bishop is a decided
advantage, since not only are there Pawns on both sides of the board, but
there is a passed Pawn (K R P for White, Q R P for Black). Black should
have extreme difficulty in drawing this position, if he can do it at all.
{58}

EXAMPLE 38.--Again Black would have great difficulty in drawing this
position.

[Illustration]

The student should carefully consider these positions. I hope that the many
examples will help him to understand, in their true value, the relative
merits of the Knight and Bishop. As to the general method of procedure, a
teacher, or practical experience, will be best. I might say generally,
however, that the proper course in these endings, as in all similar
endings, is: Advance of the King to the centre of the board or towards the
passed Pawns, or Pawns that are susceptible of being attacked, and rapid
advance of the passed Pawn or Pawns as far as is consistent with their
safety.

To give a fixed line of play would be folly. Each ending is different, and
requires different handling, according to what the adversary proposes to
do. Calculation by visualising the future positions is what will count.
{59}

       *       *       *       *       *

15. HOW TO MATE WITH A KNIGHT AND A BISHOP

Now, before going back again to the middle-game and the openings, let us
see how to mate with Knight and Bishop, and, then, how to win with a Queen
against a Rook.

With a Knight and a Bishop _the mate can only be given in the corners of
the same colour as the Bishop_.

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 39.--In this example we must mate either at Q R 1 or K R 8. The
ending can be divided into two parts. Part one consists in driving the
Black King to the last line. We might begin, as is generally done in all
such cases, by advancing the King to the centre of the board:

        1. K - K 2                K - Q 2

Black, in order to make it more difficult, goes towards the white-squared
corner:

        2. K - Q 3                K - B 3
        3. B - B 4                K - Q 4
  {60}
        4. Kt - K 2               K - B 4
        5. Kt - B 3               K - Kt 5
        6. K - Q 4                K - R 4
        7. K - B 5                K - R 3
        8. K - B 6                K - R 2
        9. Kt - Q 5               K - R 1

The first part is now over; the Black King is in the white-squared corner.

[Illustration]

The second and last part will consist in driving the Black King now from
Q R 8 to Q R 1 or K R 8 in order to mate him. Q R 1 will be the quickest in
this position.

       10. Kt - Kt 6 ch           K - R 2
       11. B - B 7                K - R 3
       12. B - Kt 8               K - R 4
       13. Kt - Q 5               K - R 5

Black tries to make for K R 1 with his King. White has two ways to prevent
that, one by 14 B - K 5, {61} K - Kt 6; 15 Kt - K 3, and the other which I
give as the text, and which I consider better for the student to learn,
because it is more methodical and more in accord with the spirit of all
these endings, _by using the King as much as possible_.

       14. K - B 5 !              K - Kt 6
       15. Kt - Kt 4              K - B 6
       16. B - B 4                K - Kt 6
       17. B - K 5                K - R 5
       18. K - B 4                K - R 4
       19. B - B 7 ch             K - R 5
       20. Kt - Q 3               K - R 6
       21. B - Kt 6               K - R 5
       22. Kt - Kt 2 ch           K - R 6
       23. K - B 3                K - R 7
       24. K - B 2                K - R 6
       25. B - B 5 ch             K - R 7
       26. Kt - Q 3               K - R 8
       27. B - Kt 4               K - R 7
       28. Kt - B 1 ch            K - R 8
       29. B - B 3 mate

It will be seen that the ending is rather laborious. There are two
outstanding features: the close following by the King, and the controlling
of the squares of opposite colour to the Bishop by the combined action of
the Knight and King. The student would do well to exercise himself
methodically in this ending, as it gives a very good idea of the actual
power of the pieces, and it requires foresight in order to accomplish the
{62} mate within the fifty moves which are granted by the rules.

       *       *       *       *       *

16. QUEEN AGAINST ROOK

This is one of the most difficult endings without Pawns. The resources of
the defence are many, and when used skilfully only a very good player will
prevail within the limit of fifty moves allowed by the rules. (The rule is
that at any moment you may demand that your opponent mate you within fifty
moves. However, every time a piece is exchanged or a Pawn advanced the
counting must begin afresh.)

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 40.--This is one of the standard positions which Black can often
bring about. Now, it is White's move. If it were Black's move it would be
simple, as he would have to move his Rook away from the King (find out
why), and then the Rook would be {63} comparatively easy to win. We deduce
from the above that the main object is to force the Black Rook away from
the defending King, and that, in order to compel Black to do so, we must
bring about the position in the diagram with _Black_ to move. Once we know
what is required, the way to proceed becomes easier to find. Thus:

        1. Q - K 5 ch

Not 1 Q - R 6, because R - B 2 ch; 2 K - Kt 6, R - B 3 ch; 3 K × R.
Stalemate. (The beginner will invariably fall into this trap.)

        1. ........               K to R 1 or to R 2
        2. Q - R 1 ch             K - Kt 1
        3. Q - R 5

In a few moves we have accomplished our object. The first part is
concluded. Now we come to the second part. The Rook can only go to a White
square, otherwise the first check with the Queen will win it. Therefore

        3. ........               R - Kt 6
        4. Q - K 5 ch             K - R 1 best
        5. Q - R 8 ch             K - R 2
        6. Q - Kt 7 ch            K - R 1
        7. Q - Kt 8 ch            R - Kt 1
        8. Q - R 2 mate

(The student should find out by himself how to win when 3...R - Kt 8;
4 Q - K 5 ch, K - R 2.) {64}

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 41.--The procedure here is very similar. The things to bear in mind
are that the Rook must be prevented from interposing at Kt 1 because of an
immediate mate, and in the same way the King must be prevented from going
either to R 3 or B 1.

EXAMPLE 42.--We shall now examine a more difficult position.

[Illustration] {65}

Many players would be deceived by this position. The most likely looking
move is not the best. Thus suppose we begin

        1. Q - K 5 ch             K - B 1
        2. K - Kt 6               R - Q 2

The only defence, but, unfortunately, a very effective one, which makes it
very difficult for White, since he cannot play 3 Q - K 6 because of
3...R - Kt 2 ch; 4 K - B 6, R - Kt 3 ch draws. Nor can he win quickly by
3 Q - Q B 5 ch because 3...K - K 1, 4 K - B 6, R - Q 3 ch ! driving back
the White King.

Now that we have seen the difficulties of the situation let us go back. The
best move is

        1. Q - Kt 5 ch !          K - R 1

If K - R 2; 2 Q - Kt 6 ch, K - R 1; 3 K - R 6 !

        2. Q - K 5 ch !           K - R 2 best
        3. K - Kt 5               R - R 2 ! best

If 3...R - Kt 2 ch; 4 K - B 6 leads to a position similar to those in
Examples 40 and 41.

        4. Q - K 4 ch             K - Kt 1
        5. Q - B 4 ch             K - R 2
        6. K - B 6                R - K Kt 2
        7. Q - R 4 ch             K - Kt 1
        8. Q - R 5

{66} and we have the position of Example 40 with Black to move.

Let us go back again.

        1. Q - Kt 5 ch            K - B 1
        2. Q - Q 8 ch             K - Kt 2
        3. K - Kt 5               R - B 6

The best place for the Rook away from the King. 3...K - R 2; 4 Q - Q 4,
R - Kt 2 ch; 5 K - B 6 would lead to positions similar to those already
seen.

        4. Q - Q 4 ch             K - B 1
        5. K - Kt 6

5 Q - Q 6 ch, K - Kt 2; 6 Q - K 5 ch, K - B 1; 7 K - Kt 6 would also win
the Rook. The text move, however, is given to show the finesse of such
endings. White now threatens mate at Q 8.

        5. ........               R - Kt 6 ch
        6. K - B 6                R - B 6 ch
        7. K - K 6                R - K R 6

White threatened mate at K R 8.

        8. Q - B 4 ch

and the Rook is lost.

Note, in these examples, that the checks at long range along the diagonals
have often been the key to all the winning manoeuvres. Also that the Queen
and {67} King are often kept on different lines. The student should
carefully go over these positions and consider all the possibilities not
given in the text.

He should once more go through everything already written before proceeding
further with the book.

       *       *       *       *       *


{68}

CHAPTER III

PLANNING A WIN IN MIDDLE-GAME PLAY

I shall now give a few winning positions taken from my own games. I have
selected those that I believe can be considered as _types_, i.e. positions
that may easily occur again in a somewhat similar form. A knowledge of such
positions is of great help; in fact, one cannot know too many. It often may
help the player to find, with little effort, the right move, which he might
not be able to find at all without such knowledge.

17. ATTACKING WITHOUT THE AID OF KNIGHTS

[Illustration] {69}

EXAMPLE 43.--It is Black's move, and as he is a Kt and P behind he must win
quickly, if at all. He plays:

        1. ........               Q R - Kt 1 !
        2. R - B 2

If, Q × Q, R × P ch; K - R 1, B - Q 4 and mate follows in a few moves.

        2. ........               R × P ch
        3. K - B 1                B - B 5 ch
        4. Kt × B                 R - Kt 8 mate

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 44.--Black's last move was P - K 6, played with the object of
stopping what he thought was White's threat, viz.: R - Q R 5, to which he
would have answered Q - B 5 ch and drawn the game by perpetual check.
White, however, has a more forceful move, and he mates in three moves as
follows: {70}

        1. R × P ch               Q × R
        2. R - Q R 5              Black moves
        3. White mates

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 45.--White has a beautiful position, but still he had better gain
some material, if he can, before Black consolidates his defensive position.
He therefore plays:

        1. R × Kt !               P × R
        2. B × P ch               K - K 2

If Kt × B; R × Kt and Black would be helpless.

        3. Q - R 7 ch             K - K 1
        4. Q × Kt ch              K - Q 2
        5. Q - R 7 ch             Q - K 2
        6. B - B 8                Q × Q
        7. R × Q ch               K - K 1
        8. R × R                  Resigns

In these few examples the attacking has been done by Rooks and Bishops in
combination with the Queen. {71} There have been no Knights to take part in
the attack. We shall now give some examples in which the Knights play a
prominent part as an attacking force.

       *       *       *       *       *

18. ATTACKING WITH KNIGHTS AS A PROMINENT FORCE

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 46.--White is two Pawns behind. He must therefore press on his
attack. The game continues:

        1. Kt (B 5) × Kt P        Kt - B 4

Evidently an error which made the winning easier for White, as he simply
took the Rook with the Knight and kept up the attack. Black should have
played: 1 ... Kt × Kt. Then would have followed: 2 Kt - B 6 ch, K - Kt 3;
3 Kt × B, P - B 3 (best); 4 P - K 5, K - B 2; 5 Kt × P, R - K 2;
6 Kt - K 4, and Black should lose.[4]

{72}

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 47.--The student should carefully examine the position, as the
sacrifice of the Bishop in similar situations is typical, and the chance
for it is of frequent occurrence in actual play. The game continues:

        1. B × P ch               K × B
        2. Kt - Kt 5 ch           K - Kt 3

Best. If 2...K - R 3; 3 Kt × P ch wins the Queen, and if 2...K - Kt 1;
3 Q - R 5, with an irresistible attack.

        3. Q - Kt 4               P - B 4
        4. Q - Kt 3               K - R 3

White finally won.[5]

{73}

       *       *       *       *       *

19. WINNING BY INDIRECT ATTACK

We have so far given positions where the attacks were of a violent nature
and directed against the King's position. Very often, however, in the
middle-game attacks are made against a position or against pieces, or even
Pawns.

_The winning of a Pawn among good players of even strength often means the
winning of the game._

Hence the study of such positions is of great importance. We give below two
positions in which the attack aims at the gain of a mere Pawn as a means of
ultimately winning the game.

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 48.--Black is a Pawn behind, and there is no violent direct attack
against White's King. Black's pieces, however, are very well placed and
free to act, and by co-ordinating the action of all his pieces he is soon
able not only to regain the Pawn but to obtain the better game. The student
should carefully {74} consider this position and the subsequent moves. It
is a very good example of proper co-ordination in the management of forces.
The game continues:

        1. ........               R - R 1
        2. P - Q R 4

White's best move was P - Q Kt 3, when would follow Kt × B; 3 Q × Kt,
R - R 6 and Black would ultimately win the Q R P, always keeping a slight
advantage in position. The text move makes matters easier.

        2. ........               Kt × B
        3. Q × Kt                 Q - B 5
        4. K R - Q 1              K R - Kt 1

Black could have regained the Pawn by playing B × Kt, but he sees that
there is more to be had, and therefore increases the pressure against
White's Queen side. He now threatens, among other things, R × Kt P.

        5. Q - K 3                R - Kt 5

Threatening to win the exchange by B - Q 5.

        6. Q - Kt 5               B - Q 5 ch
        7. K - R 1                Q R - Kt 1

This threatens to win the Kt, and thus forces White to give up the
exchange.

        8. R × B                  Q × R
        9. R - Q 1                Q - B 5

Now Black will recover his Pawn. {75}

[Illustration]

EXAMPLE 49.--An examination of this position will show that Black's main
weakness lies in the exposed position of his King, and in the fact that his
Q R has not yet come into the game. Indeed, if it were Black's move, we
might conclude that he would have the better game, on account of having
three Pawns to two on the Queen's side, and his Bishop commanding the long
diagonal.

It is, however, White's move, and he has two courses to choose from. The
obvious move, B - B 4, might be good enough, since after 1 B - B 4,
Q R - Q 1; 2 P - Q Kt 4 would make it difficult for Black. But there is
another move which completely upsets Black's position and wins a Pawn,
besides obtaining the better position. That move is Kt - Q 4 ! The game
continues as follows:

        1. Kt - Q 4 !             P × Kt
        2. R × B                  Kt - Kt 5

{76}

There is nothing better, as White threatened B - B 4.

        3. B - B 4 ch             K - R 1
        4. R - K 6                P - Q 6
        5. R × P

And White, with the better position, is a Pawn ahead.

These positions have been given with the idea of acquainting the student
with different types of combinations. I hope they will also help to develop
his imagination, a very necessary quality in a good player. The student
should note, in all these middle-game positions, that--

_once the opportunity is offered, all the pieces are thrown into action "en
masse" when necessary;_ and that _all the pieces smoothly co-ordinate their
action with machine-like precision._

That, at least, is what the ideal middle-game play should be, if it is not
so altogether in these examples.

       *       *       *       *       *


{77}

CHAPTER IV

GENERAL THEORY

Before we revert to the technique of the openings it will be advisable to
dwell a little on general theory, so that the openings in their relation to
the rest of the game may be better understood.

20. THE INITIATIVE

As the pieces are set on the board both sides have the same position and
the same amount of material. White, however, has the move, and the move in
this case means _the initiative_, and the initiative, other things being
equal, is an advantage. Now this advantage must be kept as long as
possible, and should only be given up if some other advantage, material or
positional, is obtained in its place. White, according to the principles
already laid down, develops his pieces as fast as possible, but in so doing
he also tries to hinder his opponent's development, by applying pressure
wherever possible. He tries first of all to control the centre, and failing
this to obtain some positional advantage that will make it possible for him
to keep on harassing the enemy. He only relinquishes the initiative when he
gets for it some material advantage under such favourable conditions as to
make him feel {78} assured that he will, in turn, be able to withstand his
adversary's thrust; and finally, through his superiority of material, once
more resume the initiative, which alone can give him the victory. This last
assertion is self-evident, since, in order to win the game, the opposing
King must be driven to a position where he is attacked without having any
way of escape. Once the pieces have been properly developed the resulting
positions may vary in character. It may be that a direct attack against the
King is in order; or that it is a case of improving a position already
advantageous; or, finally, that some material can be gained at the cost of
relinquishing the initiative for a more or less prolonged period.

       *       *       *       *       *

21. DIRECT ATTACKS _EN MASSE_

In the first case the attack must be carried on with sufficient force to
guarantee its success. Under no consideration must a direct attack against
the King be carried on _à outrance_ unless there is absolute certainty in
one's own mind that it will succeed, since failure in such cases means
disaster.

EXAMPLE 50.--A good example of a successful direct attack against the King
is shown in the following diagram:

In this position White could simply play B - B 2 and still have the better
position, but instead he prefers an immediate attack on the King's side,
with {79} the certainty in his mind that the attack will lead to a win. The
game continues thus:[6]

[Illustration]

       12. B × P ch               K × B
       13. Kt - Kt 5 ch           K - Kt 3
       14. Q - Kt 4               P - B 4

Best. P - K 4 would have been immediately fatal. Thus: 14...P - K 4;
15 Kt - K 6 ch, K - B 3; 16 P - B 4 ! P - K 5; 17 Q - Kt 5 ch, K × Kt;
18 Q - K 5 ch, K - Q 2; 19 K R - Q 1 ch, Kt - Q 6; 20 Kt × P, K - B 3 (if
K - K 1, Kt - Q 6 ch wins the Queen); 21 R × Kt, Q × R; 22 R - B 1 ch,
K - Kt 3 (if K - Q 2 mate in two); 23 Q - B 7 ch and mate in five moves.

{80}

       15. Q - Kt 3               K - R 3
       16. Q - R 4 ch             K - Kt 3
       17. Q - R 7 ch             K - B 3

If K × Kt; Q × Kt P ch and mate in a few moves.

       18. P - K 4                Kt - Kt 3
       19. P × P                  P × P
       20. Q R - Q 1              Kt - Q 6
       21. Q - R 3                Kt (Q 6) - B 5
       22. Q - Kt 3               Q - B 2
       23. K R - K 1              Kt - K 7 ch

This blunder loses at once, but the game could not be saved in any case;
e.g. 23...B - K 3; 24 R × B ch, Kt × R; 25 Kt - Q 5 mate.

       24. R × Kt                 Q × Q
       25. Kt - R 7 ch            K - B 2
       26. R P × Q                R - R 1
       27. Kt - Kt 5 ch           K - B 3
       28. P - B 4                Resigns

EXAMPLE 51.--Another example of this kind:

[Illustration] {81}

In the above position the simple move Kt × P would win, but White looks for
complications and their beauties. Such a course is highly risky until a
wide experience of actual master-play has developed a sufficient insight
into all the possibilities of a position. This game, which won the
brilliancy prize at St. Petersburg in 1914, continued as follows:--

       21. B - R 4                Q - Q 2
       22. Kt × B                 Q × R
       23. Q - Q 8 ch             Q - K 1

If K - B 2; 24 Kt - Q 6 ch, King moves; 25 mate.

       24. B - K 7 ch             K - B 2
       25. Kt - Q 6 ch            K - Kt 3
       26. Kt - R 4 ch            K - R 4

If 26...K - R 3; 27 Kt (Q 6) - B 5 ch, K - R 4; 28 Kt × P ch, K - R 3;
29 Kt (R 4) - B 5 ch, K - Kt 3; 30 Q - Q 6 ch and mate next move.

       27. Kt × Q                 R × Q
       28. Kt × P ch              K - R 3
       29. Kt (Kt 7) - B 5 ch     K - R 4
       30. P - K R 3 !

The climax of the combination started with 21 B - R 4. White is still
threatening mate, and the best way to avoid it is for Black to give back
all the material he has gained and to remain three Pawns behind.

The student should note that in the examples given the attack is carried
out with every available piece, {82} and that often, as in some of the
variations pointed out, it is the coming into action of the last available
piece that finally overthrows the enemy. It demonstrates the principle
already stated:

_Direct and violent attacks against the King must be carried _en masse_,
with full force, to ensure their success. The opposition must be overcome
at all cost; the attack cannot be broken off, since in all such cases that
means defeat._

       *       *       *       *       *

22. THE FORCE OF THE THREATENED ATTACK

Failing an opportunity, in the second case, for direct attack, one must
attempt to increase whatever weakness there may be in the opponent's
position; or, if there is none, one or more must be created. It is always
an advantage to threaten something, but such threats must be carried into
effect only if something is to be gained immediately. For, holding the
threat in hand, forces the opponent to provide against its execution and to
keep material in readiness to meet it. Thus he may more easily overlook, or
be unable to parry, a thrust at another point. But once the threat is
carried into effect, it exists no longer, and your opponent can devote his
attention to his own schemes. One of the best and most successful
manoeuvres in this type of game is to make a demonstration on one side, so
as to draw the forces of your opponent to that side, then through the
greater mobility of your pieces to shift your forces quickly {83} to the
other side and break through, before your opponent has had the time to
bring over the necessary forces for the defence.

A good example of positional play is shown in the following game:

EXAMPLE 52.--Played at the Havana International Masters Tournament, 1913.
(French Defence.) White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: R. Blanco.

        1. P - K 4                P - K 3
        2. P - Q 4                P - Q 4
        3. Kt - Q B 3             P × P
        4. Kt × P                 Kt - Q 2
        5. Kt - K B 3             K Kt - B 3
        6. Kt × Kt ch             Kt × Kt
        7. Kt - K 5

[Illustration]

This move was first shown to me by the talented Venezuelan amateur, M.
Ayala. The object is to {84} prevent the development of Black's Queen's
Bishop _viâ_ Q Kt 2, after P - Q Kt 3, which is Black's usual development
in this variation. Generally it is bad to move the same piece twice in an
opening before the other pieces are out, and the violation of that
principle is the only objection that can be made to this move, which
otherwise has everything to recommend it.

        7. ........               B - Q 3
        8. Q - B 3

[Illustration]

B - K Kt 5 might be better. The text move gives Black an opportunity of
which he does not avail himself

        8. ........               P - B 3

P - B 4 was the right move. It would have led to complications, in which
Black might have held his own; at least, White's play would be very
difficult. The text move accomplishes nothing, and puts Black {85} in an
altogether defensive position. The veiled threat B × Kt; followed by
Q - R 4 ch; is easily met.

        9. P - B 3                O - O
       10. B - K Kt 5             B - K 2

The fact that Black has now to move his Bishop back clearly demonstrates
that Black's plan of development is faulty. He has lost too much time, and
White brings his pieces into their most attacking position without
hindrance of any sort.

       11. B - Q 3                Kt - K 1

The alternative was Kt - Q 4. Otherwise White would play Q - R 3, and Black
would be forced to play P - K Kt 3 (not P - K R 3, because of the sacrifice
B × P), seriously weakening his King's side.

       12. Q - R 3                P - K B 4

White has no longer an attack, but he has compelled Black to create a
marked weakness. Now White's whole plan will be to exploit this weakness
(the weak K P), and the student can now see how the principles expounded
previously are applied in this game. Every move is directed to make the
weak King's Pawn untenable, or to profit by the inactivity of the Black
pieces defending the Pawn, in order to improve the position of White at
other points.

       13. B × B                  Q × B
       14. O - O                  R - B 3
       15. K R - K 1              Kt - Q 3
       16. R - K 2                B - Q 2

{86} At last the Bishop comes out, not as an active attacking piece, but
merely to make way for the Rook.

       17. Q R - K 1              R - K 1
       18. P - Q B 4              Kt - B 2

A very clever move, tending to prevent P - B 5, and tempting White to play
Kt × B, followed by B × P, which would be bad, as the following variation
shows: 19 Kt × B, Q × Kt; 20 B × P, Kt - Kt 4; 21 Q - Kt 4, R × B;
22 P - K R 4, P - K R 4; 23 Q × R, P × Q; 24 R × R ch, K - R 2; 25 P × Kt,
Q × P. But it always happens in such cases that, if one line of attack is
anticipated, there is another; and this is no exception to the rule, as
will be seen.

[Illustration]

       19. P - Q 5 !              Kt × Kt

Apparently the best way to meet the manifold threats of White. B P × P
would make matters worse, as the White Bishop would finally bear on the
weak King's Pawn _viâ_ Q B 4. {87}

       20. R × Kt                 P - K Kt 3
       21. Q - R 4                K - Kt 2
       22. Q - Q 4                P - B 4

Forced, as White threatened P × K P, and also Q × P

       23. Q - B 3                P - Kt 3

Q - Q 3 was better. But Black wants to tempt White to play P × P, thinking
that he will soon after regain his Pawn with a safe position. Such,
however, is not the case, as White quickly demonstrates. I must add that in
any case Black's position is, in my opinion, untenable, since all his
pieces are tied up for the defence of a Pawn, while White's pieces are free
to act.

       24. P × P                  B - B 1

[Illustration]

       25. B - K 2 !

The deciding and timely manoeuvre. All the Black pieces are useless after
this Bishop reaches Q 5. {88}

       25. ........               B × P
       26. B - B 3                K - B 2
       27. B - Q 5                Q - Q 3

Now it is evident that all the Black pieces are tied up, and it only
remains for White to find the quickest way to force the issue. White will
now try to place his Queen at K R 6, and then advance the K R P to R 5 in
order to break up the Black Pawns defending the King.

       28. Q - K 3                R - K 2

If 28...P - B 5; 29 Q - K R 3, P - K R 4; 30 Q - R 4, R - K 2; 31 Q - Kt 5,
K - Kt 2; 32 P - K R 4, Q - Q 2; 33 P - K Kt 3, P × P; 34 P - B 4, and
Black will soon be helpless, as he has to mark time with his pieces while
White prepares to advance P - R 5, and finally at the proper time to play
R × B, winning.

       29. Q - R 6                K - Kt 1
       30. P - K R 4              P - R 3
       31. P - R 5                P - B 5
       32. P × P                  P × P
       33. R × B                  Resigns.

Commenting on White's play in this game, Dr. E. Lasker said at the time
that if White's play were properly analysed it might be found that there
was no way to improve upon it.

These apparently simple games are often of the most difficult nature.
Perfection in such cases is much more difficult to obtain than in those
positions calling {89} for a brilliant direct attack against the King,
involving sacrifices of pieces.

       *       *       *       *       *

23. RELINQUISHING THE INITIATIVE

In the third case, there is nothing to do, once the material advantage is
obtained, but to submit to the opponent's attack for a while, and once it
has been repulsed to act quickly with all your forces and win on material.
A good example of this type of game is given below.

EXAMPLE 53.--From the Havana International Masters Tournament, 1913. (Ruy
Lopez.) White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: D. Janowski.

        1. P - K 4                P - K 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             Kt - Q B 3
        3. B - Kt 5               Kt - B 3
        4. O - O                  P - Q 3
        5. B × Kt ch              P × B
        6. P - Q 4                B - K 2
        7. Kt - B 3

P × P might be better, but at the time I was not familiar with that
variation, and therefore I played what I knew to be good.

        7. ........               Kt - Q 2
        8. P × P                  P × P
        9. Q - K 2                O - O
       10. R - Q 1                B - Q3
       11. B - Kt 5               Q - K 1
       12. Kt - K R 4             P - Kt 3

{90} Black offers the exchange in order to gain time and to obtain an
attack. Without considering at all whether or not such a course was
justified on the part of Black, it is evident that as far as White is
concerned there is only one thing to do, viz., to win the exchange and then
prepare to weather the storm. Then, once it is passed, to act quickly with
all forces to derive the benefit of numerical superiority.

       13. B - R 6                Kt - B 4
       14. R - Q 2                R - Kt 1
       15. Kt - Q 1               R - Kt 5

To force White to play P - Q B 4, and thus create a hole at Q 5 for his
Knight.[7] Such grand tactics show the hand of a master.

       16. P - Q B 4              Kt - K 3
       17. B × R                  Q × B
       18. Kt - K 3

Kt - K B 3 was better.

       18. ........               Kt - Q 5
       19. Q - Q 1                P - Q B 4

In order to prevent R × Kt giving back the exchange, but winning a Pawn and
relieving the position.

       20. P - Q Kt 3             R - Kt 1

In order to play B - Kt 2 without blocking his Rook.

{91} Black's manoeuvring for positional advantage is admirable throughout
this game, and if he loses it is due entirely to the fact that the
sacrifice of the exchange, without even a Pawn for it, could not succeed
against sound defensive play.

[Illustration]

       21. Kt - B 3               P - B 4
       22. P × P                  P × P

[Illustration]

The position begins to look really dangerous for White. In reality Black's
attack is reaching its maximum force. Very soon it will reach the apex, and
then {92} White, who is well prepared, will begin his counter action, and
through his superiority in material obtain an undoubted advantage.

       23. Kt - B 1               P - B 5
       24. Kt × Kt                B P × Kt
       25. Q - R 5                B - Kt 2
       26. R - K 1                P - B 4

He could not play R - K 1 because of R × Q P. Besides, he wants to be ready
to play P - K 5. At present White cannot with safety play R × K P, but he
will soon prepare the way for it. Then, by giving up a Rook for a Bishop
and a Pawn, he will completely upset Black's attack and come out a Pawn
ahead. It is on this basis that White's whole defensive manoeuvre is
founded.

       27. P - B 3                R - K 1
       28. R (Q 2) - K 2          R - K 3

[Illustration]

Now the Black Rook enters into the game, but White is prepared. It is now
time to give back the exchange. {93}

       29. R × P                  B × R
       30. R × B                  R - K R 3
       31. Q - K 8                Q × Q
       32. R × Q ch               K - B 2
       33. R - K 5                R - Q B 3
       34. Kt - Q 2

R - B 5 ch might have been better. The text move did not prove as strong as
anticipated.

       34. ........               K - B 3
       35. R - Q 5                R - K 3
       36. Kt - K 4 ch            K - K 2

R × Kt would lose easily

       37. R × B P                P - Q 6 !

Very fine. White cannot play R B 7 ch because of K - Q 1; R × B, R × Kt
winning.

       38. K - B 2                B × Kt
       39. P × B                  R × P
       40. R - Q 5                R - K 6

The ending is very difficult to win. At this point White had to make the
last move before the game was adjourned.

[Illustration] {94}

       41. P - Q Kt 4 !           R - K 5
       42. R × P                  R × P
       43. R - K R 3              R × P
       44. R × P ch               K - B 3
       45. R × P                  K - B 4
       46. K - B 3                R - Kt 7
       47. R - R 5 ch             K - B 3
       48. R - R 4                K - Kt 4
       49. R × P                  R × R P
       50. P - R 4 ch             K - R 4
       51. R - B 5 ch             K - R 3
       52. P - Kt 4               Resigns

I have passed over the game lightly because of its difficult nature, and
because we are at present concerned more with the opening and the
middle-game than we are with the endings, which will be treated separately.

       *       *       *       *       *

24. CUTTING OFF PIECES FROM THE SCENE OF ACTION

Very often in a game a master only plays to cut off, so to speak, one of
the pieces from the scene of actual conflict. Often a Bishop or a Knight is
completely put out of action. In such cases we might say that from that
moment the game is won, because for all practical purposes there will be
one more piece on one side than on the other. A very good illustration is
furnished by the following game. {95}

EXAMPLE 54.--Played at the Hastings Victory Tournament, 1919. (Four
Knights.) White: W. Winter. Black: J. R. Capablanca.

        1. P - K 4                P - K 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             Kt - Q B 3
        3. Kt - B 3               Kt - B 3
        4. B - Kt 5               B - Kt 5
        5. O - O                  O - O
        6. B × Kt

Niemzowitch's variation, which I have played successfully in many a game.
It gives White a very solid game. Niemzowitch's idea is that White will in
due time be able to play P - K B 4, opening a line for his Rooks, which, in
combination with the posting of a Knight at K B 5, should be sufficient to
win. He thinks that should Black attempt to stop the Knight from going to
K B 5, he will have to weaken his game in some other way. Whether this is
true or not remains to be proved, but in my opinion the move is perfectly
good. On the other hand, there is no question that Black can easily develop
his pieces. But it must be considered that in this variation White does not
attempt to hinder Black's development, he simply attempts to build up a
position which he considers impregnable and from which he can start an
attack in due course.

        6. ........               Q P × B

{96} The alternative, Kt P × B; gives White the best of the game, without
doubt.[8]

        7. P - Q 3                B - Q 3
        8. B - Kt 5

This move is not at all in accordance with the nature of this variation.
The general strategical plan for White is to play P - K R 3, to be followed
in time by the advance of the K Kt P to Kt 4, and the bringing of the Q Kt
to K B 5 via K 2 and K Kt 3 or Q 1 and K 3. Then, if possible, the K Kt is
linked with the other Kt by placing it at either K R 4, K Kt 3, or K 3 as
the occasion demands. The White King sometimes remains at Kt 1, and other
times it is placed at K Kt 2, but mostly at K R 1. Finally, in most cases
comes P - K B 4, and then the real attack begins. Sometimes it is a direct
assault against the King,[9] and at other times it comes simply to
finessing for positional advantage in the end-game, after most of the
pieces have been exchanged.[10]

        8. ........               P - K R 3
        9. B - R 4                P - B 4

{97}

[Illustration]

To prevent P - Q 4 and to draw White into playing Kt - Q 5, which would
prove fatal. Black's plan is to play P - K Kt 4, as soon as the
circumstances permit, in order to free his Queen and Knight from the pin by
the Bishop.

       10. Kt - Q 5

White falls into the trap. Only lack of experience can account for this
move. White should have considered that a player of my experience and
strength could never allow such a move if it were good.

       10. ........               P - K Kt 4

[Illustration] {98} After this move White's game is lost. White cannot play
Kt × Kt P, because Kt × Kt will win a piece. Therefore he must play
B - Kt 3, either before or after Kt × Kt, with disastrous results in either
case, as will be seen.

       11. Kt × Kt ch             Q × Kt
       12. B - Kt 3               B - Kt 5
       13. P - K R 3              B × Kt
       14. Q × B                  Q × Q
       15. P × Q                  P - K B 3

[Illustration]

A simple examination will show that White is minus a Bishop for all
practical purposes. He can only free it by sacrificing one Pawn, and
possibly not even then. At least it would lose time besides the Pawn. Black
now devotes all his energy to the Queen's side, and, having practically a
Bishop more, the result cannot be in doubt. The rest of the game is given,
so that the student may see how simple it is to win such a game. {99}

       16. K - Kt 2               P - Q R 4
       17. P - Q R 4              K - B 2
       18. R - R 1                K - K 3
       19. P - R 4                K R - Q Kt 1

There is no necessity to pay any attention to the King's side, because
White gains nothing by exchanging Pawns and opening the King's Rook file.

       20. P × P                  R P × P
       21. P - Kt 3               P - B 3
       22. R - Q R 2              P - Kt 4
       23. K R - R 1              P - B 5

If White takes the proffered Pawn, Black regains it immediately by
R - Kt 5, after P × B P.

       24. R P × P                P × P (Kt 6)
       25. B P × P                R × P
       26. R - R 4                R × P
       27. P - Q 4                R - Kt 4
       28. R - B 4                R - Kt 5
       29. R × B P                R × P
           Resigns

       *       *       *       *       *

25. A PLAYER'S MOTIVES CRITICISED IN A SPECIMEN GAME

Now that a few of my games with my own notes have been given, I offer for
close perusal and study a very fine game played by Sir George Thomas, one
of England's foremost players, against Mr. F. F. L. Alexander, in the
championship of the City of London Chess Club in the winter of 1919-1920.
It has the {100} interesting feature for the student that Sir George Thomas
kindly wrote the notes to the game for me at my request, and with the
understanding that I would make the comments on them that I considered
appropriate. Sir George Thomas' notes are in brackets and thus will be
distinguished from my own comments.

EXAMPLE 55.--Queen's Gambit Declined. (_The notes within brackets by Sir
George Thomas._) White: Mr. F. F. L. Alexander. Black: Sir George Thomas.

        1. P - Q 4                P - Q 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             Kt - K B 3
        3. P - B 4                P - K 3
        4. Kt - B 3               Q Kt - Q 2
        5. B - Kt 5               P - B 3
        6. P - K 3                Q - R 4

[Illustration]

(One of the objects of Black's method of defence is to attack White's Q Kt
doubly by Kt - K 5, followed by P × P. But 7 Kt - Q 2 is probably a strong
way {101} of meeting this threat.) There are, besides, two good reasons for
this method of defence; first, that it is not as much played as some of the
other defences and consequently not so well known, and second that it
leaves Black with two Bishops against B and Kt, which, in a general way,
constitutes an advantage.

        7. B × Kt                 Kt × B
        8. P - Q R 3              Kt - K 5
        9. Q - Kt 3               B - K 2

This is not the logical place for the B which should have been posted at
Q 3. In the opening, time is of great importance, and therefore the player
should be extremely careful in his development and make sure that he posts
his pieces in the right places.

       10. B - Q 3                Kt × Kt
       11. P × Kt                 P × P
       12. B × B P                B - B 3

(I did not want White's Kt to come to K 5, from where I could not dislodge
it by P - K B 3 without weakening my K P.) The same result could be
accomplished by playing B - Q 3. Incidentally it bears out my previous
statement that the B should have been originally played to Q 3.

       13. O - O

The alternative was P - K 4, followed by P - K 5, and then O - O. White
would thereby assume the initiative but would weaken his Pawn position
considerably, and might be compelled to stake all on a {102} violent attack
against the King. This is a turning point in the game, and it is in such
positions that the temperament and style of the player decide the course of
the game.

       13. ........               O - O
       14. P - K 4                P - K 4

[Illustration]

       15. P - Q 5

(White might play 15 K R - Q 1, keeping the option of breaking up the
centre later on. I wanted him to advance this P as there is now a fine post
for my B at Q B 4.) By this move White shows that he does not understand
the true value of his position. His only advantage consisted in the
undeveloped condition of Black's Q B. He should therefore have made a plan
to prevent the B from coming out, or if that were not possible, then he
should try to force Black to weaken his Pawn position in order to come out
with the B. There were three moves to consider: first, {103} P - Q R 4, in
order to maintain the White B in the dominating position that it now
occupies. This would have been met by Q - B 2; second, either of the Rooks
to Q 1 in order to threaten 16 P × P, B × P; 17 Kt × B, Q × Kt;
18 B × P ch. This would have been met by B - Kt 5; and third, P - K R 3 to
prevent B - Kt 5 and by playing either R to Q 1, followed up as previously
stated to force Black to play P - Q Kt 4, which would weaken his Queen's
side Pawns. Thus by playing P - K R 3 White would have attained the desired
object. The text move blocks the action of the White B and facilitates
Black's development. Hereafter White will act on the defensive, and the
interest throughout the rest of the game will centre mainly on Black's play
and the manner in which he carries out the attack.

       15. ........               Q - B 2
       16. B - Q 3

(This seems wrong, as it makes the development of Black's Queen wing
easier. At present he cannot play P - Q Kt 3, because of the reply P × P
followed by B - Q 5.)

       16. ........               P - Q Kt 3
       17. P - B 4                B - Kt 2
       18. K R - B 1

(With the idea of Q R - Kt 1 and P - B 5. But it only compels Black to
bring his B to Q B 4, which he would do in any case.)

{104} /*    18. ........ B - K 2    19. R - B 2 B - B 4    20. Q - Kt 2
P - B 3 */

(It would have been better, probably, to play 20...K R - K 1, with the idea
of P - B 4 presently.) Black's play hereabout is weak; it lacks force, and
there seems to be no well-defined plan of attack. It is true that these are
the most difficult positions to handle in a game. In such cases a player
must conceive a plan on a large scale, which promises chances of success,
and with it all, it must be a plan that can be carried out with the means
at his disposal. From the look of the position it seems that Black's best
chance would be to mass his forces for an attack against White's centre, to
be followed by a direct attack against the King. He should, therefore, play
Q R - K 1, threatening P - K B 4. If White is able to defeat this plan, or
rather to prevent it, then, once he has fixed some of the White pieces on
the King's side, he should quickly shift his attack to the Queen's side,
and open a line for his Rooks, which, once they enter in action, should
produce an advantage on account of the great power of the two Bishops.

       21. Q R - Kt 1             Q R - Q 1
       22. P - Q R 4              B - R 3
       23. R - Q 1

(White has clearly lost time with his Rook's moves.)

       23. ........               K R - K 1
       24. Q - Kt 3

{105}

(To bring his Queen across after Kt - R 4 and B - K 2.)

       24. ........               R - Q 3
       25. Kt - R 4               P - Kt 3
       26. B - K 2

[Illustration]

       26. ........               P × P

(I thought this exchange necessary here, as White is threatening to play
his Bishop via Kt 4 to K 6. If he retook with the Bishop's Pawn I intended
to exchange Bishops and rely on the two Pawns to one on the Queen's wing. I
did not expect him to retake it with the King's Pawn, which seemed to
expose him to a violent King's side attack.) Black's judgment in this
instance I believe to be faulty. Had White retaken with the B P, as he
expected, he would have had the worst of the Pawn position, as White would
have had a passed Pawn well supported on the Queen's side. His only
advantage would lie in his having a very well posted Bishop against a badly
{106} posted Knight, and on the fact that in such positions as the above,
the Bishop is invariably stronger than the Knight. He could and should have
prevented all that, by playing B - B 1, as, had White then replied with
Q - Kt 3, he could then play P × P, and White would not have been able to
retake with the B P on account of B × P ch winning the exchange.

       27. K P × P                P - K 5
       28. P - Kt 3               P - K 6

I do not like this move. It would have been better to hold it in reserve
and to have played P - B 4, to be followed in due time by P - K Kt 4 and
P - B 5, after having placed the Q at Q 2, K B 2, or some other square as
the occasion demanded. The text move blocks the action of the powerful B at
Q B 4, and tends to make White's position safer than it should have been.
The move in itself is a very strong attacking move, but it is isolated, and
there is no effective continuation. Such advances as a rule should only be
made when they can be followed by a concerted action of the pieces.

       29. P - B 4                B - B 1
       30. Kt - B 3               B - B 4
       31. R - Kt 2               R - K 5
       32. K - Kt 2               Q - B 1
       33. Kt - Kt 1              P - K Kt 4

{107}

(If now 34 B - B 3, P × P; 35 B × R, B × B ch, with a winning attack.)

       34. P × P                  P × P
       35. R - K B 1              P - Kt 5

R - R 3 was the alternative. White's only move would have been K - R 1. The
position now is evidently won for Black, and it is only a question of
finding the right course. The final attack is now carried on by Sir George
Thomas in an irreproachable manner.

       36. B - Q 3                R - K B 3
       37. Kt - K 2               Q - B 1

[Illustration]

(Again preventing B × R, by the masked attack on White's Rook. White
therefore protects his Rook.) If Kt - B 4, P - K 7 !; 39 Kt × P, R × Kt ch;
40 R × R, B - K 5 ch !!; 41 B × B, best, R × R and White is lost. If,
however, against 38 Kt - B 4, Black plays Q - R 3, and White 39 Q - B 2, I
take pleasure {108} in offering the position to my readers as a most
beautiful and extraordinary win for Black, beginning with
39...Q - R 6 ch !!! I leave the variations for the student to work out.

       38. R (Kt 2) - Kt 1        Q - R 3
       39. Q - B 2

(Making a double attack on the Rook--which still cannot be taken--and
preparing to defend the K R P.) If either the Rook or Bishop are taken
White would be mated in a few moves.

       39. ........               Q - R 6 ch
       40. K - R 1                R × P !!

[Illustration]

(If 40...R - R 3; 41 Kt - Kt 1, Q × Kt P; 42 Q - K Kt 2. Black therefore
tries to get the Queen away from the defence.) A very beautiful move, and
the best way to carry on the attack.

       41. Q × R

{109}

(The best defence was 41 R × B, but Black would emerge with Queen against
Rook and Knight.)

       41. ........               B × B

(Again, not R - K R 3; because of P - Q 6 dis. ch.)

       42. R × R

(If 42 Q × B, then, at last, R - R 3 wins.)

       42. ........               B × Q
       43. Kt - B 4               P - K 7 !

[Illustration]

(The Queen has no escape, but White has no time to take it.)

       44. R - K Kt 1             Q - B 8

White resigns. A very fine finish.

       *       *       *       *       *


{110}

CHAPTER V

END-GAME STRATEGY

We must now revert once more to the endings. Their importance will have
become evident to the student who has taken the trouble to study my game
with Janowski (Example 53). After an uneventful opening--a Ruy Lopez--in
one of its normal variations, my opponent suddenly made things interesting
by offering the exchange; an offer which, of course, I accepted. Then
followed a very hard, arduous struggle, in which I had to defend myself
against a very dangerous attack made possible by the excellent manoeuvring
of my adversary. Finally, there came the time when I could give back the
material and change off most of the pieces, and come to an ending in which
I clearly had the advantage. But yet the ending itself was not as simple as
it at first appeared, and finally--perhaps through one weak move on my
part--it became a very difficult matter to find a win. Had I been a weak
end-game player the game would probably have ended in a draw, and all my
previous efforts would have been in vain. Unfortunately, that is very often
the case among the large majority of players; they are weak in the endings;
a failing from which masters of the first rank are at times not free. {111}
Incidentally, I might call attention to the fact that all the world's
champions of the last sixty years have been exceedingly strong in the
endings: Morphy, Steinitz, and Dr. Lasker had no superiors in this
department of the game while they held their titles.

26. THE SUDDEN ATTACK FROM A DIFFERENT SIDE

I have previously stated, when speaking about general theory, that at times
the way to win consists in attacking first on one side, then, granted
greater mobility of the pieces, to transfer the attack quickly from one
side to the other, breaking through before your opponent has been able to
bring up sufficient forces to withstand the attack. This principle of the
middle-game can sometimes be applied in the endings in somewhat similar
manner.

EXAMPLE 56.

[Illustration] {112}

In the above position I, with the Black pieces, played:

        1. ........               R - K 5 ch
        2. R - K 2                R - Q R 5
        3. R - R 2                P - K R 4

The idea, as will be seen very soon, is to play P - R 5 in order to fix
White's King's side Pawns with a view to the future. It is evident to Black
that White wants to bring his King to Q Kt 3 to support his two weak
isolated Pawns, and thus to free his Rooks. Black, therefore, makes a plan
to shift the attack to the King's side at the proper time, in order to
obtain some advantage from the greater mobility of his Rooks.

        4. R - Q 1                R (Q 4) - Q R 4

in order to force the Rook to Rook's square, keeping both Rooks tied up.

        5. R (Q 1) - R 1          P - R 5
        6. K - Q 2                K - Kt 2
        7. K - B 2                R - K Kt 4

Black begins to transfer his attack to the King's side.

        8. R - K Kt 1

A serious mistake, which loses quickly. White should have played
8 K - Kt 3, when Black would have answered 8...R (R 5) - R 4; 9 P - B 3,
and Black would have obtained an opening at K Kt 6 for his King, which in
the end might give him the victory.

        8. ........               R - K B 5

{113} Now the King cannot go to Kt 3, because of R - Kt 4 ch.

        9. K - Q 3                R - B 6 ch
       10. K - K 2

If P × R, R × R; followed by R - K R 8 winning,

       10. ........               R × R P

and Black won after a few moves.

EXAMPLE 57.--Another good example, in which is shown the advantage of the
greater mobility of the pieces in an ending, is the following from a game
Capablanca-Kupchick played at the Havana Masters Tournament, 1913. The full
score and notes of the game can be found in the book of the tournament.

[Illustration]

White's only advantage in the above position is that he possesses the open
file and has the move, which will secure him the initiative. There is also
the slight advantage of having his Pawns on the Queen's side united, while
Black has an isolated Q R P. The {114} proper course, as in the previous
ending, is to bring the Rooks forward, so that at least one of them may be
able to shift from one side of the board to the other, and thus keep
Black's Rooks from moving freely. What this means in general theory has
been stated already; it really means: _keep harassing the enemy; force him
to use his big pieces to defend Pawns. If he has a weak point, try to make
it weaker, or create another weakness somewhere else and his position will
collapse sooner or later. If he has a weakness, and he can get rid of it,
make sure that you create another weakness somewhere else_.

From the position in question the game continued thus:

        1. R - K 4                K R - K 1

with the object of repeating White's manoeuvre, and also not to allow White
the control of the open file.

        2. Q R - K 1              R - K 3
        3. Q R - K 3              R (B 1) - K 1
        4. K - B 1                K - B 1

Black wants to bring his King to the centre of the board in order to be
nearer to whatever point White decides to attack. The move is justified at
least on the general rule that in such endings the King should be in the
middle of the board. He does nothing after all but follow White's
footsteps. Besides, it is hard to point out anything better. If
4...P - Q 4; 5 R - Kt 4 ch, followed by K - K 2, would leave Black in {115}
a very disagreeable position. If 4...P - K B 4; 5 R - Q 4! R × R? 6 P × R,
R × P; 7 K - B 2, R - K 2; 8 R - Q R 4, winning the Q R P, which would
practically leave White with a passed Pawn ahead on the Queen's side, as
the three Pawns of Black on the King's side would be held by the two of
White.

        5. K - K 2                K - K 2
        6. R - Q R 4              R - Q R 1

The student should note that through the same manoeuvre Black is forced
into a position similar to the one shown in the previous ending.

        7. R - R 5!

This move has a manifold object. It practically fixes all of Black's Pawns
except the Q P, which is the only one that can advance two squares. It
specially prevents the advance of Black's K B Pawns, and at the same time
threatens the advance of White's K B Pawns to B 4 and B 5. By this threat
it practically forces Black to play P - Q 4, which is all White desires,
for reasons that will soon become evident.

        7. ........               P - Q 4
        8. P - Q B 4!             K - Q 3

Evidently forced, as the only other move to save a Pawn would have been
P × P, which would have left all Black's Pawns isolated and weak. If
8...P - Q 5; 9 R - K 4, K - Q 3; 10 P - Q Kt 4! R - K 4; 11 R - R 6, and
Black's game is hopeless.

        9. P - B 5 ch             K - Q 2
       10. P - Q 4                P - B 4

{116} Apparently very strong, since it forces the exchange of Rooks because
of the threat R - R 3; but in reality it leads to nothing. The best chance
was to play R - K K 1.

       11. R × R                  P × R
       12. P - B 4

Up to now White had played with finesse, but this last move is weak.
R - R 6 was the proper way to continue, so as to force Black to give up his
Q R P or Q B P.

       12. ........               K - B 1
       13. K - Q 2

Again a bad move. 13 R - R 3 was the proper continuation, and if then
13...R - Kt 1; 14 P - Kt 3, K - Kt 2; 15 P - Kt 4, K - R 1; 16 R - Q Kt 3,
with excellent winning chances; in fact, I believe, a won game.

[Illustration]

       13. ........               K - Kt 2

Black misses his only chance. R - Kt 1 would have drawn. {117}

       14. R - R 3                R - K Kt 1
       15. R - R 3                R - Kt 2
       16. K - K 2                K - R 3
       17. R - R 6                R - K 2
       18. K - Q 3                K - Kt 2

He goes back with the King to support his K P, and thus be able to utilise
his Rook. It is, however, useless, and only White's weak play later on
gives him further chances of a draw.

       19. P - K R 4              K - B 1
       20. R - R 5

To prevent the Black Rook from controlling the open file

       20. ........               K - Q 2
       21. R - Kt 5               R - B 2
       22. K - B 3                K - B 1

He must keep his King on that side because White threatens to march with
his King to R 6 via Kt 4.

       23. K - Kt 4               R - B 3
       24. K - R 5                K - Kt 2
       25. P - R 4                P - Q R 3
       26. P - R 5                R - R 3

He can do nothing but wait for White. The text move stops White from moving
his Rook, but only for one move.

       27. P - Kt 4               R - B 3

The only other move was K - R 2; when White could play R - Kt 7, or even
P - Kt 5. {118}

[Illustration]

       28. P - Kt 5

A weak move, which gives Black a fighting chance. In this ending, as is
often the case with most players, White plays the best moves whenever the
situation is difficult and requires careful handling, but once his position
seems to be overwhelming he relaxes his efforts and the result is nothing
to be proud of. The right move was 28 R - Kt 7.

       28. ........               R P × P
       29. P × P                  R - B 1 !
       30. R - Kt 7               R - R 1 ch
       31. K - Kt 4               P × P
       32. K × P                  R - R 7
       33. P - B 6 ch             K - Kt 1
       34. R × R P                R - Kt 7 ch
       35. K - R 5                R - R 7 ch
       36. K - Kt 4               R × P

Black misses his last chance: R - Kt 7 ch, forcing the King to B 3, in
order to avoid the perpetual, {119} would probably draw. The reader must
bear in mind that my opponent was then a very young and inexperienced
player, and consequently deserves a great deal of credit for the fight he
put up.

       37. R - K 7                R × P

R - Kt 7 ch; followed by R - K R 7, offered better chances.

       38. P - R 6!               R × P ch
       39. K - Kt 5               R - Q 8
       40. P - R 7                R - Kt 8 ch
       41. K - B 5                R - B 8 ch
       42. K - Q 4                R - Q 8 ch
       43. K - K 5                R - K 8 ch
       44. K - B 6                R - K R 8
       45. R - K 8 ch             K - R 2
       46. P - R 8 (Q)            R × Q
       47. R × R                  K - Kt 3
       48. K × P                  K × P
       49. K × P                  K - B 4
       50. K - K 5                Resigns.

This ending shows how easy it is to make weak moves, and how often, even in
master-play, mistakes are made and opportunities are lost. It shows that,
so long as there is no great advantage of material, even with a good
position, a player, no matter how strong, cannot afford to relax his
attention even for one move. {120}

       *       *       *       *       *

27. THE DANGER OF A SAFE POSITION

EXAMPLE 58.--A good proof of the previous statement is shown in the
following ending between Marshall and Kupchick in one of their two games in
the same Tournament (Havana, 1913).

[Illustration]

It is evident that Marshall (White) is under great difficulties in the
above position. Not only is he bound to lose a Pawn, but his position is
rather poor. The best he could hope for was a draw unless something
altogether unexpected happened, as it did. No reason can be given for
Black's loss of the game except that he felt so certain of having the best
of it with a Pawn more and what he considered a safe position, that he
became exceedingly careless and did not consider the danger that actually
existed. Let us see how it happened.

        1. P - Kt 4               R × R P

{121} The mistakes begin. This is the first. Black sees that he can take a
Pawn without any danger, and does not stop to think whether there is
anything better. R - B 7 ch was the right move. If then K - Kt 3, R × P. If
instead White played K - K 4, then R - K 4 ch followed by R × R P.

        2. R - Q 1                R - R 5 ch

Mistake number two, and this time such a serious one as to almost lose the
game. The proper move was to play P - B 4 in order to break up White's
Pawns and at the same time make room for the Black King, which is actually
in danger, as will soon be seen.

        3. R - Q 4                R (R5) - R 4

Mistake number three and this time fatal. His best move was R (Kt 4) - R 4.
After the text move there is no defence. Black's game is lost. This shows
that even an apparently simple ending has to be played with care. From a
practically won position Black finds himself with a lost game, and it has
only taken three moves.

        4. R (Q 4) - Q 8          R - Kt 2

If 4...P - B 4; 5 R - R 8 ch, K - Kt 3; 6 R (B 8) - Kt 8 ch, K - B 3;
7 R × P ch, R - Kt 3; 8 P - Kt 5 ch, K - K 2; 9 R (R 6) × R, P × R;
10 R - Kt 7 ch, K - K 1; 11 R × Kt P, and wins easily.

        5. P - R 4                P - R 4
        6. R - R 8 ch             Resigns.

The reason is evident. If 6...K - Kt 3; 7 P × P ch, {122} R × P; 8 R × R,
K × R; 9 R - R 8 ch, K - Kt 3; 10 P - R 5 mate.

       *       *       *       *       *

28. ENDINGS WITH ONE ROOK AND PAWNS

The reader has probably realised by this time that endings of two Rooks and
Pawns are very difficult, and that the same holds true for endings of one
Rook and Pawns. Endings of two Rooks and Pawns are not very common in
actual play; but endings of one Rook and Pawns are about the most common
sort of endings arising on the chess board. Yet though they do occur so
often, few have mastered them thoroughly. They are often of a very
difficult nature, and sometimes while apparently very simple they are in
reality extremely intricate. Here is an example from a game between
Marshall and Rosenthal in the Manhattan Chess Club Championship Tournament
of 1909-1910.

EXAMPLE 59.

[Illustration]

{123} In this position Marshall had a simple win by R - B 7 ch, but played
P - B 6, and thereby gave Black a chance to draw. Luckily for him Black did
not see the drawing move, played poorly, and lost. Had Black been up to the
situation he would have drawn by playing R - Q 3.

        1. P - B 6                R - Q 3 !

Now White has two continuations, either (_a_) P - B 7, or (_b_) R - B 7 ch.
We have therefore:

  (a)   2. P - B 7                R - Q 1 !
        3. R - R 5 ch             K - B 5

and White will finally have to sacrifice the Rook for Black's Pawn. Or--

  (b)   2. R - B 7 ch             K - Q 5 !
        3. P - B 7                R - Kt 3 ch !

a very important move, as against R - K B 3, R - K 7 wins.

        4. K - B 1                R - K B 3
        5. R - Kt 7               K - B 6

and White will finally have to sacrifice the Rook for the Pawn, or draw by
perpetual check.

If there were nothing more in the ending it would not be of any great
value, but there are other very interesting features. Now suppose that
after 1 P - B 6, R - Q 3; 2 P - B 7, Black did not realise that R - Q 1 was
the only move to draw. {124} We would then have the following position:

[Illustration]

Now there would be two other moves to try: either (_a_) R - Kt 3 ch, or
(_b_) R - K B 3. Let us examine them.

  (a)   1. ........               R - Kt 3 ch
        2. K - B 3                R - B 3 ch
        3. K - K 3                R - K 3 ch

If P - Kt 6; R - R 5 ch wins, because if the King goes back, then R - R 6,
and if the King goes up, then R - R 4 ch, followed by R - K B 4 wins.

        4. K - Q 3                R - K B 3

If R - Q 3 ch; K - K 4 wins.

        5. R - R 5 ch             K moves
        6. R - R 6 wins



  (b)   1. ........               R - B 3
        2. R - Kt 7 !             K - B 5

If P - Kt 6; R - Kt 3, and White will either capture the Pawn or go to
K B 3, and come out with a winning ending. {125}

        3. P - R 4                P - Kt 6
        4. R - Kt 4 ch            K moves
        5. R - Kt 3

and White will either capture the Pawn or play R - K B 3, according to the
circumstances, and come out with a winning ending.

Now, going back to the position shown on page 122, suppose that after
1 P - B 6, R - Q 3; 2 R - B 7 ch, Black did not realise that K - Q 5 was
the only move to draw, and consequently played K - Kt 3 instead, we would
then have the following position:

[Illustration]

Now the best continuation would be:

        1. P - B 7                R - Kt 3 ch (best)
        2. K - B 1                R - K B 3
        3. R - K 7 !              K - B 4 (best)

White threatened to check with the Rook at K 6.

        4. K - K 2                P - Kt 6

{126} Best. If K - B 5; both P - R 4 and K - K 3 will win; the last-named
move particularly would win with ease.

        5. R - K 3                P - Kt 7 (best)
        6. R - Q Kt 3             R × P
        7. R × P                  R - K R 2
        8. R - Q 2                R × P
        9. K - K 3

[Illustration]

This position we have arrived at is won by White, because there are two
files between the opposing King and the Pawn from which the King is cut off
by the Rook, and besides, the Pawn can advance to the fourth rank before
the opponent's Rook can begin to check on the file. This last condition is
very important, because if, instead of the position on the diagram, the
Black Rook were at K R 1, and Black had the move, he could draw by
preventing the {127} advance of the Pawn, either through constant checks or
by playing R - K B 1 at the proper time.

Now that we have explained the reasons why this position is won, we leave
it to the student to work out the correct solution.

The fact that out of one apparently simple ending we have been able to work
out several most unusual and difficult endings should be sufficient to
impress upon the student's mind the necessity of becoming well acquainted
with all kinds of endings, and especially with endings of Rook and Pawns.

       *       *       *       *       *

29. A DIFFICULT ENDING: TWO ROOKS AND PAWNS

Following our idea that the best way to learn endings as well as openings
is to study the games of the masters, we give two more endings of two Rooks
and Pawns. These endings, as already stated, are not very common, and the
author is fortunate in having himself played more of these endings than is
generally the case. By carefully comparing and studying the endings already
given (Examples 56 and 57) with the following, the student no doubt can
obtain an idea of the proper method to be followed in such cases. The way
of procedure is somewhat similar in all of them.

EXAMPLE 60.--From a game, Capablanca-Kreymborg, in the New York State
Championship Tournament of 1910. {128}

[Illustration]

It is Black's move, and no doubt thinking that drawing such a position
(that was all Black played for) would be easy, he contented himself with a
waiting policy. Such conduct must always be criticised. It often leads to
disaster. _The best way to defend such positions is to assume the
initiative and keep the opponent on the defensive._

        1. ........               Q R - K 1

The first move is already wrong. There is nothing to gain by this move.
Black should play P - Q R 4; to be followed by P - Q R 5; unless White
plays P - Q Kt 3. That would _fix_ the Queen's side. After that he could
decide what demonstration he could make with his Rooks to keep the
opponent's Rooks at bay.

        2. R - Q 4

This move not only prevents P - B 5 which Black intended, but threatens
P - Kt 3, followed, after {129} P × P ch, by the attack with one or both
Rooks against Black's Q R P.

        2. ........               R - B 3

probably with the idea of a demonstration on the King's side by R - Kt 3
and Kt 7.

        3. P - Kt 3               P × P ch
        4. P × P                  K - B 2
        5. K - Q 3

R - Q R 1 should have been played now, in order to force Black to defend
with R - K 2. White, however, does not want to disclose his plan at once,
and thus awaken Black to the danger of his position, hence this move, which
seems to aim at the disruption of Black's Queen's side Pawns.

        5. ........               R - K 2
        6. R - Q R 1              K - K 3

This is a mistake. Black is unaware of the danger of his position. He
should have played P - Kt 4; threatening R - R 3, and, by making this
demonstration against White's K R P, stop the attack against his Queen's
side Pawns, which will now develop.

        7. R - R 6                R - Q B 2

He could not play K - Q 3, because P - Q B 4 would win at least a Pawn.
This in itself condemns his last move K - K 3, which has done nothing but
make his situation practically hopeless.

        8. R (Q 4) - Q R 4        P - K Kt 4

Now forced, but it is a little too late. He could not play 8...K R - B 2,
because P - K B 4 would have {130} left his game completely paralysed.
Black now finally awakens to the danger, and tries to save the day by the
counter-demonstration on the King's side, which he should have started
before. Of course, White cannot play R × R P, because of R × R, followed by
R - R 3, recovering the Pawn with advantage.

        9. P - K R 4 !            P - Kt 5

Black is now in a very disagreeable position. If he played 9...P × P;
10 R × P would leave him in a very awkward situation, as he could not go
back with the King, nor could he do much with either Rook. He practically
would have to play 10...P - K R 3, when White would answer 11 P - Kt 4,
threatening to win a Pawn by P - Kt 5, or, if that were not enough, he
might play K - Q 4, to be followed finally by the entry of the King at B 5
or K 5.

       10. K - K 2

[Illustration]

{131} /*    10. ........ P × P ch */

Again he cannot play P - K R 4, because P - K B 4 would leave him
paralysed. The advance of his K R P would make White's K R P safe, and
consequently his K R would have to retire to K B 2 to defend the Q R P.
That would make it impossible for his King to go to Q 2, because of the
Q R P, nor could he advance a single one of his Pawns. On the other hand,
White would play P - Kt 4, threatening to win a Pawn by P - Kt 5, or he
might first play K - Q 4, and then at the proper time P - Kt 5, if there
was nothing better. Black meanwhile could really do nothing but mark time
with one of his Rooks. Compare this bottling-up system with the ending in
Example 57, and it will be seen that it is very similar.

       11. K × P                  R (B 3) - B 2
       12. K - K 2

Probably wrong. P - Kt 4 at once was the right move. The text move gives
Black good chances of drawing.

       12. ........               K - Q 3
       13. P - Kt 4               R - Q Kt 2

This could never have happened had White played 12 P - Kt 4, as he could
have followed it up by P - Kt 5 after Black's K - Q 3.

       14. P - R 5

Not good. P - K B 4 offered the best chances of {132} winning by force. If
then 14...R - Kt 2; 15 P - R 5, R - Kt 7 ch; 16 K - Q 3, R - K R 7;
17 R × P, R × R; 18 R × R, R × P; 19 R - R 6, with winning chances.

[Illustration]

       14. ........               P - R 3

Black misses his last chance. P - B 5 would draw. If then 15 P × P,
R (Kt 2) - K 2 ch !; 16 K - B 1, R × P; 17 R × P, R - K 6 !

       15. P - K B 4              R - Kt 2
       16. K - Q 3                R (K Kt 2) - K 2
       17. R - R 1                R - Kt 2
       18. K - Q 4                R - Kt 7
       19. R (R 6) - R 2          R (Kt 2) - Kt 2

R (Kt 7) - Kt 2 would have offered greater resistance, but the position is
lost in any case. (I leave the student to work this out.)

       20. K - Q 3 !              R × R
       21. R × R                  R - K 2

{133} Nothing would avail. If 21...R - Kt 8; 22 R - R 6 ! R - Q 8 ch;
23 K - B 2, R - K R 8; 24 P - Kt 5, R × P; 25 R × P ch, K - Q 2;
26 R - Q R 6, and White will win easily.

       22. R - K Kt 2             R - K 3
       23. R - Kt 7               R - K 2
       24. R - Kt 8               P - B 4

Black is desperate. He sees he can no longer defend his Pawns.

       25. R - Kt 6 ch            R - K 3
       26. P × P ch               K - Q 2
       27. R - Kt 7 ch            K - B 3
       28. R × P                  K × P
       29. R - K B 7              Resigns.

EXAMPLE 61.--From the game Capablanca-Janowski, New York National
Tournament of 1913.

[Illustration]

Black's game has the disadvantage of his double Q B P, which, to make
matters worse, he cannot {134} advance, because as soon as Black plays
P - Q Kt 3, White replies P - Q Kt 4. It is on this fact that White builds
his plans. He will stop Black's Queen's side Pawns from advancing, and will
then bring his own King to K 3. Then in due time he will play P - Q 4, and
finally P - K 5, or P - K Kt 5, thus forcing an exchange of Pawns and
obtaining in that way a clear passed Pawn on the King's file. It will be
seen that this plan was carried out during the course of the game, and that
White obtained his winning advantage in that way. The play was based
throughout on the chance of obtaining a passed Pawn on the King's file,
with which White expected to win.

        1. P - K Kt 4

already preparing to play P - K Kt 5 when the time comes.

        1. ........               P - Q Kt 3

Black wants to play P - Q B 4, but White, of course, prevents it.

        2. P - Kt 4 !             K - Kt 2

This King should come to the King's side, where the danger lurks.

        3. K - B 2                P - Q Kt 4

With the object of playing K - Kt 3 and P - Q R 4, followed by P × P, and
thus have an open file for his Rook and be able to make a
counter-demonstration {135} on the Queen's side in order to stop White's
advance on the right. White, however, also prevents this.

        4. P - Q R 4 !            R - Q 5

Of course if P × P; Black will have all his Pawns on the Queen's side
disrupted and isolated, and White can easily regain the lost Pawn by
playing either Rook on the Q R file.

        5. R - Q Kt 1             R - K 4

He still wants to play P - Q B 4, but as it is easy to foresee that White
will again prevent it, the text move is really a serious loss of time.
Black should bring his King over to the other side immediately.

        6. K - K 3                R - Q 2
        7. P - R 5

The first part of White's strategic plan is now accomplished. Black's Pawns
on the Queen's side are _fixed_ for all practical purposes.

        7. ........               R - K 3

If R × R; Kt P × R would have given White a very powerful centre. Yet it
might have been the best chance for Black.

        8. R (Kt) - K B 1         R (Q 2) - K 2
        9. P - Kt 5               P × P
       10. R × P

{136}

[Illustration]

The second part of White's strategical plan is now accomplished. It remains
to find out if the advantage obtained is sufficient to win. White not only
has a passed Pawn, but his King is in a commanding position in the centre
of the board ready to support the advan